
--- 2406.02116 | 2024-06-04 | hep-th ---
TITLE: A clock is just a way to tell the time: gravitational algebras in cosmological spacetimes
AUTHORS: Chang-Han Chen, Geoff Penington
ABSTRACT: We study the algebra of observables in semiclassical quantum gravity for cosmological backgrounds, focusing on two key examples: slow-roll inflation and evaporating Schwarzschild-de Sitter black holes. In both cases, we demonstrate the existence of a nontrivial algebra of diffeomorphism-invariant observables \emph{without} the introduction of an external clock system or the presence of any asymptotic gravitational charges. Instead, the rolling inflaton field and the evaporating black hole act as physical clocks that allow a definition of gauge-invariant observables at $G = 0$. The resulting algebras are both Type II$_\infty$ factors, but neither is manifestly a crossed product algebra. We establish a connection between the Type II entropy of these algebras and generalized entropies for appropriate states. Our work extends previous results on Type II gravitational algebras and highlights the crucial role of out-of-equilibrium dynamics for defining gauge-invariant observables in semiclassical canonically quantised gravity. We also briefly discuss the construction of gauge-invariant algebras for compact wedges bounded by extremal surfaces in generic spacetimes (i.e. in the absence of any Killing symmetry). In contrast to the inflaton and black hole cases, this algebra does end up being a simple crossed product. No clock or asymptotic charges are required because of the absence of any symmetry in the classical background.

--- 2406.01669 | 2024-06-03 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Algebraic Observational Cosmology
AUTHORS: Jonah Kudler-Flam, Samuel Leutheusser, Gautam Satishchandran
ABSTRACT: What can be measured by an observer in our universe? We address this question by constructing an algebra of gravitationally-dressed observables accessible to a comoving observer in FLRW spacetimes that are asymptotically de Sitter in the past, describing an inflationary epoch. An essential quantized degree of freedom is the zero-mode of the inflaton, which leads to fluctuations in the effective cosmological constant during inflation and prevents the existence of a maximum entropy state in the semiclassical limit. Due to the inaccessibility of measurements beyond our cosmological horizon, we demonstrate that all states are mixed with well-defined von Neumann entropy (up to a state-independent constant). For semiclassical states, the von Neumann entropy corresponds to the generalized entropy of the observer's causal diamond, a fine-grained quantity that is sensitive to the initial conditions of the universe.

--- 2504.07630 | 2025-04-10 | hep-th ---
TITLE: An intrinsic cosmological observer
AUTHORS: Antony J. Speranza
ABSTRACT: There has been much recent interest in the necessity of an observer degree of freedom in the description of local algebras in semiclassical gravity. In this work, we describe an example where the observer can be constructed intrinsically from the quantum fields. This construction involves the slow-roll inflation example recently analyzed by Chen and Penington, in which the gauge-invariant gravitational algebra arises from marginalizing over modular flow in a de Sitter static patch. We relate this procedure to the Connes-Takesaki theory of the flow of weights for type III von Neumann algebras, and further show that the resulting gravitational algebra can naturally be presented as a crossed product. This leads to a decomposition of the gravitational algebra into quantum field and observer degrees of freedom, with different choices of observer being related to changes in a quantum reference frame for the algebra. We also connect this example to other constructions of type II algebras in semiclassical gravity, and argue they all share the feature of being the result of gauging modular flow. The arguments in this work involve various properties of automorphism groups of hyperfinite factors, and so in an appendix we review the structure of these groups, which may be of independent interest for further investigations into von Neumann algebras in quantum gravity.

--- 2405.00847 | 2024-05-01 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Gravitational algebras and the generalized second law
AUTHORS: Thomas Faulkner, Antony J. Speranza
ABSTRACT: We derive the generalized second law (GSL) for arbitrary cuts of Killing horizons from the perspective of crossed-product gravitational algebras, making use of a recent proposal by one of us for the construction of local gravitational algebras. This construction relies on the existence of a state whose modular flow is geometric on the horizon. In both free and interacting quantum field theories, such states are guaranteed to exist by the properties of half-sided translations on the horizon. Using geometric identities derived from the canonical analysis of general relativity on null surfaces, we show that the crossed product entropy agrees with the generalized entropy of the horizon cut in a semiclassical limit, and further reproduce Wall's result relating the GSL to monotonicity of relative entropy of the quantum field algebras. We also give a novel generalization of the GSL for interacting theories in asymptotically flat spacetimes involving the concept of an algebra at infinity for a half-sided translation, which accounts for triviality of the algebra of fields smeared only on the horizon. Going beyond the semiclassical limit, we compute subleading corrections to the crossed product entropy, but are unable to determine if the GSL continues to hold after accounting for these. We speculate that an improved GSL could follow from a hidden subalgebra structure of the crossed products, assuming the existence of an operator-valued weight between horizon cut algebras.

--- 2405.00114 | 2024-04-30 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Gravitational entropy is observer-dependent
AUTHORS: Julian De Vuyst, Stefan Eccles, Philipp A. Hoehn, Josh Kirklin
ABSTRACT: In quantum gravity, it has been argued that a proper accounting of the role played by an observer promotes the von Neumann algebra of observables in a given spacetime subregion from Type III to Type II. While this allows for a mathematically precise definition of its entropy, we show that this procedure depends on which observer is employed. We make this precise by considering a setup in which many possible observers are present; by generalising previous approaches, we derive density operators for the subregion relative to different observers (and relative to arbitrary collections of observers and for arbitrary global physical states), and we compute the associated entropies in a semiclassical regime, as well as in some specific examples that go beyond this regime. We find that the entropies seen by distinct observers can drastically differ. Our work makes extensive use of the formalism of quantum reference frames (QRF); indeed, as we point out, the `observers' considered here and in the previous works are nothing but QRFs. In the process, we demonstrate that the description of physical states and observables invoked by Chandrasekaran et al. [arXiv:2206.10780] is equivalent to the Page-Wootters formalism, leading to the informal slogan "PW=CLPW". It is our hope that this paper will help motivate a long overdue union between the QRF and quantum gravity communities. Further details will appear in a companion paper.

--- 2412.15502 | 2024-12-20 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Crossed products and quantum reference frames: on the observer-dependence of gravitational entropy
AUTHORS: Julian De Vuyst, Stefan Eccles, Philipp A. Hoehn, Josh Kirklin
ABSTRACT: A significant step towards a rigorous understanding of perturbative gravitational entropy was recently achieved by a series of works showing that a proper accounting of gauge invariance and observer degrees of freedom converts the Type III algebra of QFT observables in a gravitational subregion to a Type II crossed product, whose entropy reduces to the generalized entropy formula in a semiclassical limit. The observers thus used are also known as quantum reference frames (QRFs); as noted in our companion work [arXiv:2405.00114], using different QRFs result in different algebras, and hence different entropies -- so gravitational entropy is observer-dependent. Here, we provide an in-depth analysis of this phenomenon, with full derivations of many new results. Using the perspective-neutral QRF formalism, we extend previous constructions to allow for arbitrarily many observers, each carrying a clock with possibly degenerate energy spectra. We consider a semiclassical regime characterized by clocks whose energy fluctuations dominate over the fluctuations of the energy of the QFT. Unlike previous works, we allow the clocks and fields to be arbitrarily entangled. At leading order the von Neumann entropy still reduces to the generalized entropy, but linear corrections are typically non-vanishing and quantify the degree of entanglement between the clocks and fields. We also describe an `antisemiclassical' regime as the opposite of the semiclassical one, with suppressed fluctuations of the clock energy; in this regime, we show how the clock may simply be `partially traced' out when evaluating the entropy. Four explicit examples of observer-dependent entropy are then given, involving a gravitational interferometer, degenerate clock superselection, a semiclassical approximation app

--- 2412.21185 | 2024-12-30 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Holographic observers for time-band algebras
AUTHORS: Kristan Jensen, Suvrat Raju, Antony J. Speranza
ABSTRACT: We study the algebra of observables in a time band on the boundary of anti-de Sitter space in a theory of quantum gravity. Strictly speaking this algebra does not have a commutant because products of operators within the time band give rise to operators outside the time band. However, we show that in a state where the bulk contains a macroscopic observer, it is possible to define a coarse-grained version of this algebra with a non-trivial commutant, and a resolution limited by the observer's characteristics. This algebra acts on a little Hilbert space that describes excitations about the observer's state and time-translated versions of this state. Our construction requires a choice of dressing that determines how elements of the algebra transform under the Hamiltonian. At leading order in gravitational perturbation theory, and with a specific choice of dressing, our construction reduces to the modular crossed-product described previously in the literature. We also prove a theorem showing that this is the only crossed product of a type III$_1$ algebra resulting in an algebra with a trace. This trace can be used to define entropy differences between states in the little Hilbert space that are insensitive to the properties of the observer. We discuss some technical challenges in extending this construction to higher orders in perturbation theory. Lastly, we review the construction of interior operators in the eternal black hole and show that they can be written as elements of a crossed product algebra.

--- 2411.19931 | 2024-11-29 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Linearization (in)stabilities and crossed products
AUTHORS: Julian De Vuyst, Stefan Eccles, Philipp A. Hoehn, Josh Kirklin
ABSTRACT: Modular crossed product algebras have recently assumed an important role in perturbative quantum gravity as they lead to an intrinsic regularization of entanglement entropies by introducing quantum reference frames (QRFs) in place of explicit regulators. This is achieved by imposing certain boost constraints on gravitons, QRFs and other fields. Here, we revisit the question of how these constraints should be understood through the lens of perturbation theory and particularly the study of linearization (in)stabilities, exploring when linearized solutions can be integrated to exact ones. Our aim is to provide some clarity about the status of justification, under various conditions, for imposing such constraints on the linearized theory in the $G_N\to0$ limit as they turn out to be of second-order. While for spatially closed spacetimes there is an essentially unambiguous justification, in the presence of boundaries or the absence of isometries this depends on whether one is also interested in second-order observables. Linearization (in)stabilities occur in any gauge-covariant field theory with non-linear equations and to address this in a unified framework, we translate the subject from the usual canonical formulation into a systematic covariant phase space language. This overcomes theory-specific arguments, exhibiting the universal structure behind (in)stabilities, and permits us to cover arbitrary generally covariant theories. We comment on the relation to modular flow and illustrate our findings in several gravity and gauge theory examples.

--- 2407.20671 | 2024-07-30 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Inflationary Cosmology as flow of integrable weights
AUTHORS: Cesar Gomez
ABSTRACT: We identify the algebra of gauge invariant observables in de Sitter as the subalgebra of the type $III_1$ factor $A_{dS}$, associated to de Sitter, defined as the centralizer of any integrable weight on $A_{dS}$. These algebras are for any integrable weight type $II_{\infty}$ factors admitting a crossed product representation with respect to modular automorphisms. In this context we define Inflationary Cosmology as the flow of integrable weights and the dual automorphism as the flow generator. Using some basic properties of integrable weights we show that any type $II_1$ dS algebra cannot be represented as the $ε=0$ limit ( for $ε$ the slow roll parameter ) of the gauge invariant algebra defined by any integrable weight. This strongly indicates that the pure dS algebra defined as the $ε=0$ limit is algebraically non existent.

--- 2603.25990 | 2026-03-27 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Implication of dressed form of relational observable on von Neumann algebra
AUTHORS: Min-Seok Seo
ABSTRACT: In quantum gravity, physically meaningful operator is required to be invariant under the diffeomorphisms. Such gauge invariant operator is typically given by the relational observable, the operator localized in relation to some background states. We point out that the relational observable can be comprehensively written in the form of the dressed operator. For the background having boundary where the diffeomorphisms are not gauged, we can use the gravitational Wilson line for dressing, then the relational observable is nonlocal. In contrast, when the background breaks some isometries, as can be found in quasi-de Sitter space, dressing can be local, which is a kind of Stückelberg mechanism. Since dressing resembles the outer automorphism in the von Neumann algebra, we may investigate the algebraic structure of the background by considering the dressed form of the relational observable. From this, we can understand that quasi-de Sitter space is described by the Type II$_\infty$ algebra where the trace diverges in the decoupling limit of gravity. It is different from the Type II$_1$ algebra of de Sitter space where the finite size of trace can be defined in the same limit. This shows that the isometry preserving and breaking backgrounds are quite different in the algebraic structure no matter how small the breaking effect is.

--- 2510.24833 | 2025-10-28 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Gravitational dressing: from the crossed product to more general algebraic and mathematical structure
AUTHORS: Steven B. Giddings
ABSTRACT: The crossed product, and consequent transition from von Neumann algebras of type III to II, is recovered from a truncation of more general gravitational dressing constructions, about certain spacetimes. This is done by extending "standard dressing" constructions previously used to give a perturbative definition of "gravitational splittings," defining approximate localization of information. This result appears to illustrate that this algebraic transition is a small piece of a more general algebraic, or other mathematical, structure associated with quantum gravity. The leading-order structure involves noncommutativity from separated regions, and at the nonperturbative level connects with a possible explanation of holographic behavior for gravity.

--- 2505.22708 | 2025-05-28 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Quantum gravity observables: observation, algebras, and mathematical structure
AUTHORS: Steven B. Giddings
ABSTRACT: The questions of describing observables and observation in quantum gravity appear to be centrally important to its physics. A relational approach holds significant promise, and a classification of different types of relational observables (gravitationally dressed, field relational, and more general) is outlined. Plausibly gravitationally dressed observables are particularly closely tied to the fundamental structure of the theory. These may be constructed in the quantum theory to leading order in Newton's constant, and raise important questions about localization of information. Approximate localization is given by a "standard dressing" construction of a "gravitational splitting." It is also argued that such gravitational dressings give a generalization of the crossed product construction, reducing to this and yielding type II von Neumann algebras in special cases. Gravity therefore introduces a significantly more general alteration of the algebraic structure of local quantum field theory, also with apparent connections to holography, but whose implications have not been fully understood. In particular, properties of the algebra of gravitationally dressed observables suggest a possible role for other non-algebraic structure on the Hilbert space for quantum gravity.

--- 2506.04311 | 2025-06-04 | hep-th ---
TITLE: An apologia for islands
AUTHORS: Stefano Antonini, Chang-Han Chen, Henry Maxfield, Geoff Penington
ABSTRACT: Entanglement islands have played a key role in the recent derivation of the Page curve and other progress on the black hole information problem. Arising from the inclusion of connected wormhole saddles in a gravitational replica trick, islands signal that degrees of freedom in the black hole interior are not microscopically independent of the exterior Hawking radiation. Islands were originally discovered in the context of AdS/CFT coupled to an external, nongravitating reservoir, where the coupling gives graviton excitations an anomalous boundary scaling dimension (or "mass"). It has been claimed in the literature that this mass is crucial for the existence of islands and even the Page curve itself. In this paper, however, we explain how entanglement islands can also appear in setups with massless gravitons and no external reservoir, giving a number of examples including the entanglement wedges of boundary CFT regions, of radiation at null infinity in asymptotically flat spacetimes, and of radiation inside a semiclassical but gravitating spacetime. In each case, the Page curve is physically observable and can be determined with sufficiently careful experiments on many copies of the black hole. We give general arguments for the existence of gauge-invariant operators in gravity which are compactly supported to all orders in perturbation theory (whenever no isometries of the background spacetime exist) and refine a recently-proposed explicit construction of such operators. When applied to islands, these results -- together with entanglement wedge reconstruction -- guarantee that semiclassical operators in the island can be approximated by nonperturbative operators on the Hawking radiation.

--- 2602.22153 | 2026-02-25 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Time in gravitational subregions and in closed universes
AUTHORS: Andreas Blommaert, Chang-Han Chen
ABSTRACT: What are gauge-invariant local observables in a subregion in quantum gravity? How does one even define such a subregion non-perturbatively? We study these questions in JT gravity. One can define a subregion by specifying the value of the dilaton at the boundary of the region. We study conformal matter correlators in such a subregion. There is a gravitational constraint associated with York time evolution within the causal diamond of the subregion. This constraint can be leveraged to construct gauge-invariant observables in quantum gravity, using a crossed product construction. The extrinsic curvature of Cauchy slices acts as the physical clock. This is a simple example of how gauge-invariant observables can be obtained by dressing to features of a spacetime (or other fields), without the need for introducing an external observer. The entropy associated with this algebra of observables is not an area, or any boundary term. We show that gravitational constraints only give boundary formulas for entropy when gauging isometric diffeomorphisms. York time flow is merely a conformal isometry, not an actual isometry, and thus leads to bulk contributions to entropy. We repeat our construction for Milne-type closed Big-Bang universes, which may be of independent interest.

--- 2511.00622 | 2025-11-01 | hep-th ---
TITLE: An algebra for covariant observers in de Sitter space
AUTHORS: Bin Chen, Jie Xu
ABSTRACT: In $d$-dimensional de Sitter spacetime, consistency of the perturbative expansion necessitates imposing all second-order gravitational constraints associated with the $SO(1,d)$ isometry group, rather than restricting to the $\R\times SO(d-1)$ subgroup, to address linearization instability. Since generic de Sitter isometries do not preserve a fixed static patch, these constraints cannot be implemented within a fixed local algebra. In this paper, we develop a framework that consistently imposes all $SO(1,d)$ constraints while incorporating multiple observers on arbitrary timelike geodesics. This is achieved by introducing the concept of covariant observer,  whose geodesic transforms covariantly under the isometry group. Upon quantization, the observer is described by a superposition of geodesics, with the associated static patches fluctuating, providing a quantum reference frame $L^2(SO(1,d))$. We realize this structure in an action model in which a particle carries a set of conserved charges, each one corresponding to a generator of de Sitter isometry group, which parametrize its geodesic and upon quantization lead to a fluctuating geodesic.  Inspired by the timelike tube theorem, we propose that the algebra of observables accessible to a covariant observer is generated by all degrees of freedom within its fluctuating static patch, including quantum field modes and other observers, which are treated as part of the matter system. Imposing the $SO(1,d)$ constraints yields a gauge-invariant algebra that takes the form of an averaged modular crossed product algebra over static patches and configurations of other geodesics, thereby generalizing the notion of a local algebra associated with a fixed region to that of a fluctuating region. We show this algebra is of type II by e

--- 2507.01419 | 2025-07-02 | gr-qc ---
TITLE: The Crossed Product, Modular (Tomita) Dynamics and its Role in the Transition of Type $III$ to Type $II_{\infty}$ v.Neumann Algebras and Connections to Quantum Gravity
AUTHORS: Manfred Requardt
ABSTRACT: We analyse the role of the crossed product and the modular (Tomita) dynamics in the transition of type $III$ to type $II_{\infty}$ v.Neumann algebras which was recently observed in papers by Witten et al. In a preceding paper we argued that type $II_{\infty}$ v.Neumann algebras display certain features which we attributed to quantum gravity effects. We claim that the action of the modular evolution on the quantum fluctuations can be understood as an aspect of quantum gravity. We mention in this context the work of Sakharov on induced gravity. Furthermore we analyse the change of the properties of projectors and partial isometries in the transition from type $III$ to type $II_{\infty}$.

--- 2501.06009 | 2025-01-10 | gr-qc ---
TITLE: The Role of Type $II_{\infty}$ v.Neumann Algebras and their Tensor Structure in Quantum Gravity}}
AUTHORS: Manfred Requardt
ABSTRACT: We will argue in this paper that the type classification of v.Neumann algebras play an important role in a theory of quantum gravity and quantum space-time physics. We provide arguments that type $II_{\infty}$ and its representation as a tensor product of an ordinary (exterior) Hilbert space algebra $\cB(\cH_I)$ and an (internal) type $II_1$ algebra, encoding, in our view, the hidden microscopic gravitational degrees of freedom, do represent the first step away from the semiclassical picture towards a full theory of quantum gravity.

--- 2503.19957 | 2025-03-25 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Vacua and infrared radiation in de Sitter quantum field theory
AUTHORS: Jonah Kudler-Flam, Kartik Prabhu, Gautam Satishchandran
ABSTRACT: We analyze the asymptotic behavior of quantum fields and perturbative quantum gravity in de Sitter space. We show that the necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a de Sitter invariant vacuum state in the free theory is if the local field observables commute with the ``memory observable'' on any cosmological horizon. This criterion yields simple, gauge-invariant proofs of the existence of a de Sitter invariant vacuum for the (source-free) massive scalar field, electromagnetic field and linearized gravitational field. However, the massless, minimally coupled scalar does not satisfy this criterion and, consequently, there is no de Sitter invariant vacuum state. In this case, we construct the Hilbert space of normalizable states that have ``square integrable'' distributions in the memory and the conjugate constant mode. This Hilbert space has a unitary representation of the de Sitter symmetry group but no de Sitter invariant normalizable state. However even for free theories with a normalizable de Sitter invariant vacuum we show, by a simple example, that in the presence of a source a large number of infrared particles can be produced if the source interacts with the field for timescales much longer than the Hubble time. In the limit as the source persists forever it emits an infinite number of infrared particles.

--- 2511.17382 | 2025-11-21 | gr-qc ---
TITLE: Entanglement and correlations between local observables in de Sitter spacetime
AUTHORS: Patricia Ribes-Metidieri, Ivan Agullo, Béatrice Bonga
ABSTRACT: Studies of quantum field entanglement in de Sitter space based on the von Neumann entropy of local patches have concluded that curvature enhances entanglement between regions and their complements. Similar conclusions about entanglement enhancement have been reached in analyses of Fourier modes in the cosmological patch of de Sitter space. We challenge this interpretation by adopting a fully local approach: examining entanglement between pairs of field modes compactly supported within de Sitter's cosmological patch. Our approach is formulated in terms of the properties of a metric tensor and an associated complex structure induced by the Bunch-Davies vacuum on the classical phase space. We find that increasing curvature increases correlations between local modes but, somewhat counterintuitively, decreases their entanglement. Our methods allow us to characterize how entanglement is spatially distributed, revealing that a cosmological constant, even if tiny, qualitatively alters the vacuum's entanglement structure. We show that our results are compatible with previous entropy-based studies when properly interpreted. Our findings have implications for entanglement between observables generated during cosmic inflation.

--- 2502.05135 | 2025-02-07 | hep-th ---
TITLE: De Sitter quantum gravity within the covariant Lorentzian approach to asymptotic safety
AUTHORS: Edoardo D'Angelo, Renata Ferrero, Markus B. Fröb
ABSTRACT: Recent technical and conceptual advancements in the asymptotic safety approach to quantum gravity have enabled studies of the UV completion of Lorentzian Einstein gravity, emphasizing the role of the state dependence. We present here the first complete investigation of the flow equations of the Einstein-Hilbert action within a cosmological spacetime, namely de Sitter spacetime. Using the newly derived graviton propagator for general gauges and masses in de Sitter spacetime, we analyze the dependence on the gauge and on finite renormalization parameters. Our results provide evidence of a UV fixed point for the most commonly used gauges.

--- 2404.12324 | 2024-04-18 | math-ph ---
TITLE: The Sine-Gordon QFT in de Sitter spacetime
AUTHORS: Daniela Cadamuro, Markus B. Fröb, Carolina Moreira Ferrera
ABSTRACT: We consider the massless Sine-Gordon model in de Sitter spacetime, in the regime $β^2 &lt; 4 π$ and using the framework of perturbative algebraic quantum field theory. We show that a Fock space representation exists for the free massless field, but that the natural one-parameter family of vacuum-like states breaks the de Sitter boost symmetries. We prove convergence of the perturbative series for the S matrix in this representation, and construct the interacting Haag-Kastler net of local algebras from the relative S matrices. We show that the net fulfills isotony, locality and de Sitter covariance (in the algebraic adiabatic limit), even though the states that we consider are not invariant. We furthermore prove convergence of the perturbative series for the interacting field and the vertex operators, and verify that the interacting equation of motion holds.

--- 2601.07915 | 2026-01-12 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Subregion algebras in classical and quantum gravity
AUTHORS: Venkatesa Chandrasekaran, Éanna É. Flanagan
ABSTRACT: We study the kinematics and dynamics of subregion algebras in classical and perturbative quantum gravity associated with portions of null surfaces such as event horizons and finite causal diamonds. We construct half-sided supertranslation generators by extending subregion phase spaces of the event horizon to include doubled pairs of corner edge modes obtained from splitting the horizon, namely relative boosts and null translations of the respective corners. These edge modes carry a corner symplectic form and give rise to canonical charges generating half-sided boosts and translations. We show that the null translation generator is necessarily two-sided in the complementary translation edge modes. The charges act nontrivially on gravitationally dressed local observables on the horizon, such that the horizon subalgebra naturally takes the form of a crossed product by the associated automorphism group. Quantizing the extended phase space after linearizing around a black hole background, we obtain for each horizon cut a Type II$_{\infty}$ von Neumann algebra equipped with a trace, whose von Neumann entropy coincides with the generalized entropy of that cut. The integrability of the half-sided null translation generator lifts to the existence of a self-adjoint operator that implements null time evolution on the Type II$_\infty$ horizon subalgebras. The area operator is identified as the bulk implementation of the Connes cocycle flow for one-sided observables in excited states. The nesting property of the resulting one-parameter family of horizon subalgebras implies a generalized second law for non-stationary linearized perturbations of Killing horizons. Lastly, we use gravitational half-sided modular inclusion algebras to prove the quantum focusing conjecture in the perturba

--- 2412.15549 | 2024-12-20 | hep-th ---
TITLE: Algebras and states in super-JT gravity
AUTHORS: Geoff Penington, Edward Witten
ABSTRACT: In bosonic JT gravity, minimally coupled to bulk matter, there exists a single, delta-function-normalisable state in each $SL(2,R)$ representation of the matter QFT for any pair of positive energies $E_L, E_R$ at the left and right boundaries. In $\mathcal{N} = 2$ super-JT gravity coupled to matter, we show that there exists a single normalisable state in each $SU(1,1|1)$ matter representation (given appropriate R-charges) that has exactly zero energy at both boundaries. For non-BPS representations, these states have the peculiar property that they break all supersymmetry in the bulk, while preserving supersymmetry at both boundaries. Projecting the algebras of boundary observables onto these zero-energy states leads to a Type II$_1$ von Neumann factor at each boundary that contains a single operator for each supersymmetric matter boundary primary with sufficiently small R-charge. For neutral boundary primaries, the Type II$_1$ factor has a natural action on the matter QFT Hilbert space (with no additional gravitational degrees of freedom) such that the QFT vacuum is the unique tracial state. Moreover, the product of neutral matter operators can be found very explicitly and has a remarkably simple form. When primaries with nonzero matter R-charge are included, the trace can be written as a sum over matter vacuum expectation values associated to each allowed boundary R-charge $J_R$, with the terms in the sum weighted by $\mathrm{cos}(πJ_R)$. In this way, the ground state algebras encode the ratios of the number of BPS microstates within each R-charge sector. In addition to the results on super-JT gravity described above, we provide a purely Lorentzian derivation of the algebraic structure of canonically quantised (bosonic) JT gravity plus matter, without appeal to the Eu
