                                         An Algebra of Observables for de Sitter Space
arXiv:2206.10780v5 [hep-th] 3 Jul 2023




                                         Venkatesa Chandrasekaran,1 Roberto Longo,2 Geoff Penington,1,3 and Edward
                                         Witten1
                                          1
                                            School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study,
                                          1 Einstein Drive, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
                                          2
                                            Dipartimento di Matematica, Universita di Roma Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca Scientifica, 1,
                                          I-00133 Roma, Italy
                                          3
                                            Center for Theoretical Physics and Department of Physics, University of California,
                                          Berkeley, CA 94720 USA


                                         Abstract: We describe an algebra of observables for a static patch in de Sitter space,
                                         with operators gravitationally dressed to the worldline of an observer. The algebra is a
                                         von Neumann algebra of Type II1 . There is a natural notion of entropy for a state of
                                         such an algebra. There is a maximum entropy state, which corresponds to empty de Sitter
                                         space, and the entropy of any semiclassical state of the Type II1 algebras agrees, up to an
                                         additive constant independent of the state, with the expected generalized entropy Sgen =
                                         (A/4GN ) + Sout . An arbitrary additive constant is present because of the renormalization
                                         that is involved in defining entropy for a Type II1 algebra.
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                         1
  1.1 Background                                                                       1
  1.2 A Type II1 Algebra For The Static Patch                                          3
  1.3 What is a Type II1 Algebra?                                                      5

2 The Algebra Of The Static Patch                                                      9
  2.1 The Static Patch                                                                 9
  2.2 The Thermal Nature of de Sitter Space                                           10
  2.3 The Algebra of Observables                                                      12
  2.4 Including an Observer                                                           13
  2.5 What Is An Observer?                                                            17
  2.6 Gravitational Dressing, and Giving the Observer an Orthonormal Frame            18

3 A Bulk Formula For The Entropy                                                      19

4 Hilbert Spaces                                                                      25
  4.1 More On Type II Algebras and Hilbert Spaces                                     25
  4.2 An Observer in the Second Patch                                                 27
  4.3 No Observer in the Second Patch                                                 31
  4.4 Euclidean Approach                                                              33

5 Revisiting the Black Hole                                                           35
  5.1 The Type II∞ algebra                                                            36
  5.2 Isometries and Gauge Constraints                                                39
  5.3 Boundary Interpretation                                                         40

A Crossed Product and Takesaki Duality                                                42

B The Hilbert Space of Coinvariants                                                   45
  B.1 Constraints and Group Averaging                                                 45
  B.2 The BRST Interpretation                                                         47
  B.3 The Observables                                                                 50




1     Introduction

1.1    Background
Not long after it was understood that an entropy should be associated to the horizon area
of a black hole [1, 2], Gibbons and Hawking [3] proposed that similarly, the area of a




                                          –1–
cosmological horizon should be interpreted as an entropy. Specifically, they considered an
observer in a de Sitter space with radius of curvature rdS . The worldline of the observer
is assumed to be timelike. The region of de Sitter space that is causally accessible to such
an observer is bounded by past and future horizons. Gibbons and Hawking associated
to the horizon of an observer an entropy A/4GN (where A is the area of the observer’s
horizon and GN is Newton’s constant) and a temperature TdS = 1/2πrdS = 1/βdS . The
temperature, but not the entropy, had been defined earlier by Figari, Hoegh-Krohn, and
Nappi [4].
     A difference between a black hole horizon and a cosmological horizon is that, in a sense,
the notion of a cosmological horizon is more observer-dependent. A black hole horizon in
an asymptotically flat (or asymptotically Anti de Sitter) spacetime is defined in terms of
the region that is causally accessible to any observer at infinity. In a cosmological model
such as de Sitter space, different observers can see and can influence different parts of the
spacetime, and experience different horizons. De Sitter space has a great deal of symmetry,
such that the horizon of any observer has the same area. That is not true in a more general
cosmological model.
     It seems fair to say that although black hole entropy remains highly enigmatic to this
day, the entropy of a cosmological horizon, such as the de Sitter horizon, is only more
mysterious. A working hypothesis, expressed in a modern form in [5], is that black hole
entropy measures the logarithm of the dimension of a quantum Hilbert space that is needed
to describe a black hole as seen by an observer who remains outside the horizon. What
would be the analog of this for cosmological horizons? A plausible analog of an observer
who remains outside the black hole horizon is an observer in de Sitter space whose horizon
is under discussion. The region of de Sitter space causally accessible to such an observer
has been called a “static patch.” Thus a possible analog of the working hypothesis about
black hole entropy would be to say that the de Sitter entropy measures the logarithm of
the dimension of the quantum Hilbert space that an observer in the static patch can use
to account for inaccessible degrees of freedom beyond the horizon.
     Something somewhat along these lines has actually been proposed [6–14], but with a
subtle difference. To explain this point, let us consider a de Sitter space that instead of
being empty, as considered originally by Gibbons and Hawking, contains ordinary particles
and fields and perhaps even some small black holes. In this case, we follow Bekenstein
and define a generalized entropy that includes the horizon entropy A/4GN and also the
ordinary entropy Sout of the matter that the observer can see:
                                              A
                                    Sgen =       + Sout .                                (1.1)
                                             4GN

In the case of a black hole in an asymptotically flat spacetime, both terms A/4GN and Sout
can be arbitrarily large, and it takes an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space to describe the
possible states of the world as seen by an outside observer. In the case of de Sitter space,
it has been argued that this is not the case: it is claimed that the maximum possible value
for Sgen is the value that it has for empty de Sitter space [6, 7, 15]. One can certainly
increase Sout by considering a state in which the static patch is not empty. The claim is




                                             –2–
that this has the effect of reducing the horizon area, in such a way that the decrease in
A/4GN exceeds the increase in Sout .
     The proposal, then, is that empty de Sitter space maximizes the entropy of any state
of the static patch. Here by empty de Sitter space we mean the generalization with gravity
included of the natural de Sitter invariant state of quantum fields in de Sitter space [16–
20], which is often called the Bunch-Davies state. Thus in leading order for small GN , the
maximum possible entropy of a state of the static patch, including particles and fields and
black holes it may contain and also degrees of freedom that are somehow associated to the
cosmological horizon, is AdS /4GN , where AdS is the horizon area of empty de Sitter space.
(For the one-loop correction to the formula AdS /4GN for the entropy of empty de Sitter
space, see [21].)
     The existence of a maximum entropy state of de Sitter space makes possible an inter-
pretation of de Sitter entropy that does not quite have an analog for black hole entropy.
The proposal is that a Hilbert space of dimension roughly exp(AdS /4GN ) suffices to de-
scribe all possible states of the static patch, including any matter and black holes it may
contain and also the cosmological horizon [6–14]. Empty de Sitter space would then be
described by the maximally mixed state on this finite-dimensional Hilbert space [22, 23].
By contrast, in the case of a black hole, the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy A/4GN possibly
determines the size of a Hilbert space that describes the black hole as seen from outside,
but this Hilbert space does not describe particles and fields outside the black hole horizon.
     The claim that empty de Sitter space is maximally mixed may sound counterintuitive,
since the Bunch-Davies state of quantum fields reduces on the static patch to a thermal
ensemble with temperature TdS . The idea is that this thermal distribution comes purely
from entropic, rather than energetic, suppression on the full static-patch Hilbert space
[10, 11, 14]. As a simple illustration, consider a particle with energy E at rest in the center
of the static patch. The presence of such a particle reduces the area of the cosmological
horizon from AdS to
                                  Ahor /4G = AdS /4G − βdS E.                             (1.2)
We will recall the derivation of this statement in section 3. If the total number of mi-
crostates is exp(AdS /4G), and the number of microstates such that the particle has energy
E is exp(Ahor /4G), then assuming that each microstate is equiprobable, the probability to
observe a particle of energy E in the center of the static patch will be

                                    p(E) = exp(−βdS E).                                   (1.3)

In this way, one can obtain a thermal distribution purely on entropic grounds.

1.2   A Type II1 Algebra For The Static Patch
In the present article, we will make a contribution to the understanding of de Sitter entropy
by defining a von Neumann algebra of Type II1 that, in the limit of small GN , describes
the possible observations of an observer in de Sitter space. We will also reconsider and
generalize a previous discussion in which, inspired by considerations involving the large N




                                            –3–
limit in holography [24, 25], observations outside a black hole horizon were described by
an algebra of Type II∞ [26].
     The entanglement entropy of a local region in quantum field theory is always ultraviolet
divergent, as discovered long ago [27, 28]. An abstract explanation of why this happens
is that the algebra of observables in a local region in quantum field theory is of Type III
[29], and there is no notion of entropy for a state of an algebra of Type III. By contrast,
for states of an algebra of Type II, it is possible to define an entropy, though in physical
terms this is a sort of renormalized entropy with a state-independent divergent constant
subtracted. Thus, at least for the black hole and de Sitter space, the fact that gravity
converts the algebra of observables from being of Type III to being of Type II gives an
abstract explanation of why the entropy of a region of spacetime is better-defined in the
presence of gravity.
     A Type II1 algebra has a state of maximum entropy, as has been explained long ago
[30] and reconsidered recently [31]. Hence a Type II1 algebra is a candidate for describing
the physics of a static patch in de Sitter space, with empty de Sitter space corresponding
to the state of maximum entropy. By contrast, there is no upper bound on the entropy of
a state of a Type II∞ algebra. Therefore, a Type II∞ algebra is a candidate for describing
physics outside the black hole horizon.
     In section 2, we consider the problem of defining, in the limit GN → 0, an algebra of
observables in a static patch of de Sitter space. There is no asymptotic region at infinity
to which a local operator can be “gravitationally dressed,” so we assume the existence of
an observer in the static patch and we gravitationally dress operators in the static patch to
the worldline of the observer. We consider a minimal model in which the observer consists
only of a clock. The resulting algebra is of Type II1 . The maximum entropy state of the
Type II1 algebra is the natural state of empty de Sitter space (tensored with a simple
state of the observer). The density matrix of the maximum entropy state is the identity,
in keeping with the idea that this state is maximally mixed and has a flat entanglement
spectrum [22].
     In section 3, we assume that the de Sitter space is not necessarily empty and show that
(up to an additive constant that is independent of the state) the entropy of a semiclassical
state of the Type II1 algebra agrees with the generalized entropy Sgen = A/4GN + Sout .
In this, we closely follow an analysis we present elsewhere for the case of the Type II∞
algebra of a black hole [32]. We also make use of a formula of Wall expressing the generalized
entropy in terms of relative entropy on the horizon [33].
     An observer in a static patch in de Sitter space has access to observables that are
localized in that patch, but has no way to know what there is beyond the horizon and
therefore has no knowledge of a global quantum state of the whole system. However, with
some assumptions about what is beyond the horizon, one can construct a global Hilbert
space for the whole system, and the Type II1 algebra constructed in section 2 should act
naturally on this Hilbert space. We explore this question in section 4. We get a simple
answer if we assume the existence behind the horizon of a second observer who is completely
or almost completely entangled with the observer in the static patch. In the absence of
such a second observer, the question is more difficult and appears not to have a simple




                                            –4–
limit for GN → 0.
     Finally, in section 5 we reconsider the Type II∞ algebra of the black hole. We define
this Type II∞ algebra in a way that makes sense for a black hole in an asymptotically flat
spacetime (as opposed to the asymptotically AdS spacetime considered in [26]). We also
formulate the derivation in a way that shows a close analogy between the definition of the
Type II∞ algebra for the black hole and the Type II1 algebra for de Sitter space.
     Appendix A is an explanation of the crossed product construction for operator algebras
and of Takesaki duality, which underlies the construction of the Type II1 algebra for de
Sitter space. In Appendix B, we explain how, in the presence of gravity, the symmetries
of de Sitter space can be imposed as constraints in the construction of a Hilbert space of
quantum states. Here we follow previous analysis [34, 35], the only novelty being to present
the construction in the BRST framework; it is known in general that this is possible [36].
We also explain why it is more straightforward to impose constraints on operators than
on states. Some facts explained in the appendix are important background to this article,
though we explain more than we strictly need.

1.3   What is a Type II1 Algebra?
In the remainder of this introduction, we provide a short introduction to Type II1 algebras.
     A Type II1 algebra is just the natural algebra of observables that acts on a countably
infinite set of qubits in a state that is almost maximally mixed. In more detail,1 consider
a system A consisting of a countably infinite set of qubits that are almost completely
entangled with an identical system B also consisting of a countably infinite set of qubits.
In the case of a finite number N of qubit pairs, a state in which the nth qubit of system A
is maximally entangled with the nth qubit of system B for all n is
                                              N X
                                          1   O
                              ΨTFD =                     |i⟩n,A ⊗ |i⟩n,B .                       (1.4)
                                        2N/2 n=1 i=1,2

We have called this state ΨTFD because it can be viewed as the usual thermofield double
state specialized to the case that the Hamiltonian is H = 0. In the limit N → ∞, one
constructs a Hilbert space HTFD with the property that for any state in this space, almost
all of the qubit pairs are almost completely entangled in the same way as in ΨTFD . Let a
be any operator that acts on only the first k qubits of system A and define

                                     F (a) = ⟨ΨTFD |a|ΨTFD ⟩.                                    (1.5)

Since ΨTFD has been chosen so that the qubits of the A system are maximally mixed, the
density matrix of the A system is ρA = 2−N I, where I is the identity matrix. So

                                    F (a) = Tr ρA a = 2−N Tr a,                                  (1.6)

and therefore, if a, a′ are two operators that both act only on the first N qubits of system
A, then
                                 F (aa′ ) = F (a′ a) = 2−N Tr aa′ .                     (1.7)
  1
   This construction goes back to Murray and von Neumann; for a slightly different description, see for
example section 3.3 of [37].




                                                –5–
Some other important properties of F (a) are that it is normalized to

                                             F (1) = 1                                    (1.8)

and that it is positive, in the sense that

                                     F (a† a) > 0, a ̸= 0.                                (1.9)

     The function F (a) is defined as soon as one includes all the qubits that a acts on in the
definition of ΨTFD , and it is unaffected by including additional qubits, so it is well-defined
in the limit of an infinite system. Eqn. (1.7) says that the function F (a) has the algebraic
property of a trace, and it is in fact convenient to denote it as one:

                                         F (a) = Tr a.                                  (1.10)

Clearly then
                                             Tr 1 = 1                                   (1.11)
and
                                     Tr a† a > 0, a ̸= 0.                               (1.12)
So far we have defined the trace for the algebra A0 of all operators that act on only finitely
many qubits of system A. However, the definition can be extended to a larger algebra A
that consists of all operators that can be approximated sufficiently well by operators that
act on only finitely many qubits of system A. (Technically, A contains operators that are
weak limits of sequences of operators in A0 .) The algebra A is known as a von Neumann
algebra of Type II1 . The center of A consists only of complex scalars. In von Neumann
algebra language, this means that A is a “factor,” somewhat analogous to a simple Lie
group.
     We are quite familiar with a more elementary example of an infinite algebra that has a
trace, namely the algebra B of all (bounded) operators on a Hilbert space H of countably
infinite dimension. This algebra has a trace, but it is not defined for all elements, only
for those that are “trace class”; in particular, in the algebra B, the trace of the identity
operator is +∞. By contrast, a Type II1 algebra has a trace that is defined for all elements,
and which can be normalized so that Tr 1 = 1. We will see that it is natural to define a
Type II1 algebra associated to de Sitter space. The tensor product of the two algebras A
and B that we have described so far is an algebra C = A ⊗ B that turns out to be a von
Neumann algebra of Type II∞ . C is a factor, since A and B are, and it has a trace, since
A and B do, but the trace is not defined for all elements of C, since that is the case for B.
In an asymptotic expansion near N = ∞, the algebra of observables outside a black hole
horizon is of Type II∞ [26]. This was found by incorporating some 1/N corrections in a
construction of emergent Type III algebras in holographic duality [24, 25]. Our main result
in the present article is an analogous statement involving the static patch of de Sitter space
and an algebra of Type II1 .
     Though not the main focus of the present article, Type III von Neumann algebras can
be constructed in a similar way, starting with the thermofield double state for a nonzero




                                              –6–
Hamiltonian. The Hamiltonian can be taken to be a simple sum of single qubit Hamiltoni-
ans, H = i Hi , where Hi acts only on the ith qubit. In the thermodynamic limit, another
            P

novel algebra, now of Type III, can be defined just as before. The main difference is that
this algebra does not have a trace. See for example [37] for a fuller explanation.
      A Type II or Type III von Neumann algebra does not have an irreducible representation
in a Hilbert space. Whenever such an algebra acts on a Hilbert space H, it commutes
with another algebra A′ that is also of the same type, Type II or Type III. For example,
in the Murray-von Neumann construction of the Type II1 factor A that we have just
described, A obviously commutes with an isomorphic algebra Ae that acts on system B.
If Λ is a projection operator in A, e then ΛH is a subspace of H on which A acts. This
motivates the question of how “small” Λ can be and how much we can shrink H while
still getting a Hilbert space on which A acts. This question was addressed by Murray and
von Neumann. Projection operators Λ in a Type II1 algebra A (or A)     e are classified, up to
unitary equivalence in the algebra, by their trace, and any value of the trace between 0 and
1 is possible. (The values 0 and 1 occur only for Λ = 0 and Λ = 1.) In the construction
of A from the infinite system of entangled qubits, for any positive integers k and n, the
projection operator onto a k-dimensional subspace of the 2n -dimensional Hilbert space of
the first n qubits of system A gives, in the large N limit, a projection operator Λ ∈ A with
Tr Λ = k/2n . By taking limits, one can define a projection operator Λ ∈ A with any trace
between 0 and 1. (In section 4.2, we will find another construction of a projection operator
in A with any desired value of the trace between 0 and 1.)
      Murray and von Neumann showed that the Hilbert space representations of the algebra
A are classified by a parameter d, called the continuous dimension, that can be any positive
real number or ∞. The Hilbert space HTFD is defined to have d = 1, and if Λ ∈ Ae is a
projection operator with Tr Λ = f , then ΛH has d = f . Finally, d is additive in direct
sums, so for example the direct sum of k copies of HTFD has d = k. By taking d very small,
we can make a “small” representation of A, but there is no irreducible representation; any
representation can always be reduced further. The “trace” function Tr a that we defined
earlier has the algebraic properties of a trace, but it is not actually the trace in any
representation of A; it is more like a trace with an infinite factor 2N N →∞ removed.
      Since an algebra of Type II1 does not have an irreducible Hilbert space representation,
there is no notion of a pure state of such an algebra. However, there is a notion of density
matrices and entropies. This results from the fact that the bilinear form Tr aa′ on a pair of
elements a, a′ ∈ A is nondegenerate (the nondegeneracy is a consequence of the fact that
Tr a† a > 0 for a ̸= 0). So any linear function F (a) on the algebra is of the form Tr aa′ for
a unique2 a′ ∈ A.
      For example, if A acts on a Hilbert space H and Ψ is a vector in H, the function
F (a) = ⟨Ψ|a|Ψ⟩ is a linear function on A, so there is a unique ρ ∈ A such that

                                         ⟨Ψ|a|Ψ⟩ = Tr aρ.                                      (1.13)
  2
    More precisely, in general a′ may be an unbounded operator “affiliated” to A, meaning that bounded
functions of a′ are in A. We will usually omit this qualification.




                                                –7–
Since ⟨Ψ|a† a|Ψ⟩ ≥ 0 for all a ∈ A, we have Tr a† aρ ≥ 0 for all a. This is described by saying
that ρ is positive. Assuming that the state Ψ is normalized to ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩ = 1, we have Tr ρ = 1.
So ρ is a positive element of A of trace 1. By analogy with the standard terminology in
ordinary quantum mechanics, such an element of A is called a density matrix, and we define
ρ to be the density matrix of the state Ψ, for observations in A. As a simple example,
consider the state ΨTFD . Since by definition ⟨ΨTFD |a|ΨTFD ⟩ = Tr a, the density matrix of
ΨTFD is ρ = 1.
     Conversely, suppose that we are given a density matrix ρ ∈ A. In ordinary quantum
mechanics, every density matrix has a (highly non-unique) “purification.” This statement
has an analog for an algebra A of Type II1 . A purification of a density matrix ρ ∈ A
is a Hilbert space H with an action of A and a state Ψ ∈ H such that Tr aρ = ⟨Ψ|a|Ψ⟩
for all a ∈ A. The GNS construction of operator algebra theory (see for example section
3.1 of [37]) gives a simple construction of a purification of any state of a Type II1 algebra,
generalizing a standard construction in ordinary quantum mechanics in which a purification
is constructed by doubling the Hilbert space.
     Once one has density matrices, one can also define entropies; for example, the von
Neumann entropy is defined as usual as

                                               S(ρ) = −Tr ρ log ρ.                      (1.14)

Rényi entropies are defined similarly:
                                                      1
                                         Sα (ρ) =        log Tr ρα .                    (1.15)
                                                     1−α
These entropies have slightly unusual properties that we will discuss first informally and
then in a more formal way.
     The maximally mixed state of N qubits has von Neumann entropy N . So the state
ΨTFD on N qubits, reduced to system A, has entropy N , and in the N → ∞ limit its
entropy diverges. A state obtained from ΨTFD by disentangling, say, k qubits has entropy
N − k, less than N but also divergent for N → ∞. To define entropies for a state in ΨTFD ,
reduced to system A, we subtract N before taking the large N limit. With this definition,
the maximally mixed state of the infinite system of qubits has entropy 0 and other states
have negative entropy. This is the usual definition for states of an algebra of Type II1 . In
short, entropy in a Type II1 algebra is a renormalized entropy. There is a state of maximum
entropy, whose entropy is defined to be 0, and other states have negative entropy.
     Now let us see these properties from the definition3 S(ρ) = −Tr ρ log ρ. First of all,
the state of maximum entropy is ΨTFD , corresponding to ρ = 1. For ρ = 1, we do indeed
have S(ρ) = 0. To show that any other density matrix σ has S(σ) < 0, one way is as
follows. In general let ρ and σ ̸= ρ be two density matrices. As in ordinary quantum
mechanics, one can interpolate between σ and ρ by the one-parameter family of density
matrices ρt = (1 − t)ρ + tσ, 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. Let f (t) = S(ρt ). The same calculation as in
ordinary quantum mechanics shows that f ′′ (t) ≤ 0 for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. In other words, the
  3
      For previous treatments, see [30, 31].




                                                     –8–
Figure 1. The Penrose diagram of de Sitter space. An observer enters at the point p at past
infinity and exits at the point q at future infinity. Coordinates can be chosen to put these points at
corners of the diagram, as shown. The observer’s worldline is a timelike curve γ from p to q, such
as the geodesic from p to q, shown here as the vertical line on the right boundary of the diagram. P
is the static patch of this observer, and P ′ is the complementary static patch, spacelike separated
from P . The shaded regions are behind past and future horizons for an observer in either P or P ′ .


entropy is concave. If ρ = 1, one finds f (0) = f ′ (0) = 0, f ′′ (0) = −Tr (1 − σ)2 < 0.
Therefore f (t) < 0 for 0 < t ≤ 1. In particular S(σ) = f (1) < 0.
     As an example that will be relevant in section 2, let Λ be a nonzero projection operator
in A. As explained earlier, its trace is a positive number that is no greater than 1 (and equal
   e
to 1 only if Λ = 1). Therefore ρΛ = Λ/Tr Λ is a density matrix. To evaluate S(ρΛ ), we note
that the operator ρΛ has the two eigenvalues 0 and 1/Tr Λ, so ρΛ log ρΛ = ρΛ log(1/TrΛ)
and hence S(ρΛ ) = −Tr ρΛ log ρΛ = − log(1/Tr Λ) < 0.
     The algebra of operators in a local region in ordinary quantum field theory is a von
Neumann algebra of Type III, a statement that is more or less equivalent to the statement
that neither pure states nor density matrices nor entropies can be defined for such an
algebra. The main observation of the present article is that, provided an observer is
included in the description of the static patch, gravity converts the Type III algebra of
the static patch in de Sitter space to an algebra of Type II1 .

2     The Algebra Of The Static Patch

2.1    The Static Patch
What can be seen by an observer in de Sitter space? We will discuss this question first in
the context of ordinary quantum field theory in a fixed de Sitter background, and then in
the context of semiclassical quantization of gravity.
     Imagine an observer who enters a D-dimensional de Sitter space X at a point p in
past infinity and exits in the far future at a point q in future infinity (fig. 1). From p to
q, the observer travels on some worldline γ. The part of de Sitter space that is causally
accessible to the observer – the part that the observer can influence and can also see, or in




                                                –9–
other words the intersection of the past and future of γ – is bounded by past and future
horizons. The causally accessible region, which we will call P , is known as the static patch
of the observer. P depends only on the points p and q and not on the path γ. The region
of X that is spacelike separated from P , so that the observer can neither see nor influence
it, is a complementary static patch P ′ .
      Consider first an ordinary quantum field theory on X, without gravity. Such a theory
has a Hilbert space H of physical states. In general, in quantum field theory, the algebra of
observables in any local region is a von Neumann algebra of Type III [29]. So in particular,
the algebra of observables in the region P is a Type III algebra A of operators on H, and
the algebra of observables in P ′ is a second Type III algebra A′ , the commutant of the first
(A′ consists of the bounded operators that commute with A, and vice-versa). The Type
III nature of A and A′ means that there is no natural notion of entropy for a state of either
of these algebras. Concretely, if one picks a state Ψ ∈ H and attempts to compute the
entropy of the state Ψ reduced to a region of spacetime, one will encounter an ultraviolet
divergence, as first observed long ago [27, 28].

2.2   The Thermal Nature of de Sitter Space
The Hilbert space H of a quantum field theory in a fixed de Sitter background contains a
distinguished state ΨdS [16–20], sometimes called the Bunch-Davies state. The Euclidean
version of de Sitter space is a sphere S D , and the state ΨdS can be defined by analytic
continuation from S D . ΨdS is the natural “vacuum” of a quantum field in a background
de Sitter space; it is the analog for de Sitter space of the Hartle-Hawking state of a black
hole. ΨdS is invariant under the full automorphism group GdS of de Sitter space, which is
SO(1, D) or a double cover of this to include spin.
     Once we choose to focus on a particular static patch P , what is relevant is not the
full de Sitter automorphism group, but the subgroup GP that consists of automorphisms
of P . Concretely, this subgroup is GP ∼   = R × SO(D − 1), where the first factor, which
we will denote as Rt , generates what we will call the time translations of the static patch.
If the trajectory γ of the observer is chosen to be the geodesic from p to q, then Rt is
the group of translations along γ, and the second factor in GP , namely SO(D − 1), is
the group of rotations around γ. Rt is generated by a Killing vector field V that we can
choose to be future-directed timelike in the static patch P and past-directed timelike in the
complementary patch P ′ . In ordinary quantum field theory in a fixed de Sitter background,
Rt is generated by a conserved charge H that acts on the Hilbert space H.
     As argued by Gibbons and Hawking [3] (for earlier work see [4]), in quantum field
theory in a fixed de Sitter background, the state ΨdS has a thermal interpretation. The
thermal interpretation arises because, after analytic continuation to Euclidean signature,
V becomes the generator of a rotation of S D . As a result, correlation functions in the
state ΨdS can be analytically continued to periodic functions in imaginary time and can
be interpreted as correlation functions in a thermal ensemble with a Hamiltonian HP and
inverse temperature βdS = 2πrdS . Here HP generates time translations of the static patch
and rdS is the radius of curvature of the de Sitter space.




                                           – 10 –
    Importantly, HP is not the conserved charge H associated to the Killing vector field
V of de Sitter space; the operator H has no positivity, since V is past-directed in the
complementary patch P ′ . Rather, HP is supposed to be a “one-sided” Hamiltonian that
generates time translations in P , and does nothing in P ′ . Because of fluctuations near the
cosmological horizon – that is, near the boundary of P – such an operator actually cannot
be defined in the natural Hilbert space H of de Sitter space. However, it is possible with
a sort of “brick wall” boundary condition on the cosmological horizon to define a Hilbert
space HP that describes excitations in region P only and on which HP can be defined and is
bounded below. Correlation functions in the state ΨdS ∈ H of operators in the patch P can
be interpreted as thermal correlation functions of the same operators for a thermal density
matrix on HP that is proportional to exp(−βdS HP ). This is one way to make precise the
statement that correlation functions in the state ΨdS have a thermal interpretation.
    All of this is in close analogy with the thermal nature of the Hartle-Hawking state
of a black hole [38, 39] and of the Minkowski space vacuum as seen by an accelerated
observer [40]. A more or less equivalent statement in the language of operator algebras is
that, in the case of quantum field theory in a fixed de Sitter background, the “modular
Hamiltonian” Hmod which generates the modular automorphism group of the algebra A of
the static patch for the state ΨdS is

                                       Hmod = βdS H,                                    (2.1)

where H generates time translations of the static patch. The analogous statement for
the Rindler wedge, with the Minkowski space vacuum playing the role of ΨdS , is due to
Bisognano and Wichman [41]; this result was carried over to black holes by Sewell [42], and
the de Sitter case is similar. The interpretation of βdS H as the generator of the modular
automorphism group will be very important in what we say later.
     What has been described so far applies to quantum field theory in a fixed de Sitter
background, without dynamical gravity. However, a number of authors [10, 11, 13, 14] have
claimed in various ways that this picture is substantially modified when gravity becomes
dynamical, even for very small values of Newton’s constant GN . Without repeating all of
the arguments here, we can motivate some of the claims as follows. In gravity, because
diffeomorphisms are gauged, conserved charges associated to diffeomorphisms of spacetime
can be computed as surface terms. In the case of a black hole in asymptotically flat or
asymptotically AdS spacetime, the energy is an important conserved charge, and it can be
measured as a surface term at spatial infinity, namely the ADM energy. However, the static
patch in de Sitter space has no boundary at infinity. Its only boundary is the cosmological
horizon. Therefore, gravity will force the time generator HP of the static patch to have an
interpretation as a boundary term on the cosmological horizon. The leading boundary term
when the de Sitter radius is large is the area of the cosmological horizon. But according
to Gibbons and Hawking, this area is an approximation to the entropy of the static patch.
So “energy” in the static patch is really entropy. One argument in this direction [14]
involves comparing the energy of a fluctuation in the static patch to the entropy reduction
associated to observing that fluctuation. A quite different line of argument [22] that leads
to a somewhat similar conclusion involves use of a replica trick to argue that the state




                                           – 11 –
ΨdS has a flat entanglement spectrum (so that there is no relevant notion of “energy”
independent of entropy). We will recover these claims by a simple but slightly abstract
analysis of the operator algebra of the theory.

2.3    The Algebra of Observables
What algebra of observables is accessible to an observer in the static patch? A first thought
might be that in ordinary quantum field theory, the observer can measure the quantum
fields only in the immediate vicinity of the observer’s worldline γ. However, according to
the Timelike Tube Theorem [43, 44], the algebra of observables in ordinary quantum field
theory in an arbitrarily small neighborhood of γ is the same as the algebra of observables
in the static patch.4 Thus, in ordinary quantum field theory, it is reasonable to claim that
the observer can access the whole algebra A of observables in P .
     Now let us suppose that gravity is one of the fields that we want to consider in de
Sitter space. We assume, however, that GN is extremely small, or to be more precise that
the Planck length ℓ is much less than rdS . Then gravity is very weakly coupled and can
be treated perturbatively. In leading order, we make a quadratic approximation to the
gravitational action and quantize gravitational perturbations in de Sitter space in a free
field approximation. This leads to the construction of a Hilbert space Hgrav that describes
gravitational fluctuations. This must be included as a tensor factor in defining the Hilbert
space H that was the input in the previous discussion. Thus the full Hilbert space, at this
level, is
                                    H = Hmatt ⊗ Hgrav ,                                  (2.2)
where now Hmatt is the Hilbert space obtained by quantizing the matter fields.
     Including the weakly coupled gravitational field as one more quantum field in the
construction of the Hilbert space does not qualitatively change anything what we have
said so far about the algebra of observables. The Type III algebra A of the static patch
now includes operators that act on the gravitational fluctuations just as they act on any
other fluctuations. The extended Hilbert space still contains a natural state ΨdS that can
be defined by analytic continuation from Euclidean signature and it still has a thermal
interpretation.
     What does qualitatively change the picture is that, as de Sitter space is a closed
universe, with compact spatial sections, the automorphisms of de Sitter space have to
be treated as gauge constraints. This means, in particular, that the Hilbert space that
describes quantum fields and gravity in de Sitter space, in the limit GN → 0, is not H but
rather is a Hilbert space H
                          b that is constructed from H by imposing the de Sitter generators
as constraints. The procedure to do so is subtle. Naively, one might think that H  b would
be the GdS -invariant subspace of H, but this subspace is much too small, because, with the
exception of ΨdS , GdS -invariant states are not normalizable. Instead, H
                                                                        b should be defined
   4
    The Timelike Tube Theorem was formulated for quantum fields in Minkowski space. The original proof
by Borchers [43] used the Minkowski space structure in an essential way, but Araki’s proof [44] is based on
more robust considerations, and we expect that it carries over to a general spacetime. In fact, the result
has been proved for free field theories in spacetimes that are globally hyperbolic and real analytic [45] (the
condition assumed was actually weaker than real analyticity).




                                                   – 12 –
as a space of coinvariants [34, 35]. Equivalently, as we explain in Appendix B, one can
introduce a BRST complex for the action of GdS on H and define H         b as the top degree
BRST cohomology. The invariant subspace is the bottom degree BRST cohomology.
     Our goal, however, is to describe not the physics of the whole de Sitter space X,
but rather the physics of a particular static patch P . The global Hilbert space H   b is not
accessible to an observer in P . What is accessible to that observer is only an appropriate
algebra of observables. So what we really want to do is to impose the constraints not on the
Hilbert space but on the algebra of observables that is accessible to the observer. Since this
question depends on a specific choice of P , the group of constraints that we have to impose
is not the full GdS , but its subgroup GP , the group of symmetries of P . The important
symmetry is the time translation symmetry, so we will focus on that one.

2.4   Including an Observer
Imposing constraints on the algebra of observables is more straightforward conceptually
than imposing constraints on the states. As noted earlier, to impose GdS as a group of
constraints on physical states, one does not simply require that a physical state should
be annihilated by the group generators; the correct procedure is more subtle and is most
naturally described in a BRST procedure with ghosts. There is no such subtlety for op-
erators. The subtlety in the case of physical states is possible because it makes sense for
the space of physical states to consist of a BRST cohomology group of states with nonzero
ghost number, as long as only one value of the ghost number is involved. But it does not
make sense for physical operators to carry nonzero ghost number, so in imposing a group
of constraints on the algebra of operators, we can ignore the ghosts and simply restrict to
the subalgebra of invariant operators. See Appendix B for a fuller explanation.
     In particular, in the case of the static patch, imposing time translations as a constraint
means replacing A by AH , its subalgebra consisting of operators that commute with H.
However, the only H-invariant elements of A are c-numbers. In the language of operator
algebras, this is true because “the modular automorphism group acts ergodically” in this
situation, with no nontrivial invariant operators. Concretely, one might think that one
could construct an H-invariant operator by starting with any operator O and integrating
over time translations, that is, by replacing O with
                                          Z ∞
                                    O=
                                     b         dt eiHt Oe−iHt .                           (2.3)
                                         −∞

However, the matrix elements of such an Ob between any two vectors Ψ, χ ∈ H
                                                                          b are infinite
(or zero) since
                                   ⟨Ψ|eiHt Oe−iHt |χ⟩                              (2.4)
is independent of t. It will be clear from the description of H
                                                              b in Appendix B that this is
true, even though Ψ and χ cannot simply be characterized as GdS -invariant elements of H.
     Since AH is trivial, the only way to get anything sensible is to include the degrees
of freedom of the observer as part of the analysis. A minimal model of the observer that
suffices for our purposes is to say that the Hamiltonian of the observer is Hobs = q, where




                                            – 13 –
q is a new variable. It is physically sensible to assume that the energy of the observer is
non-negative, so we will assume that q ≥ 0. Thus the Hilbert space of the observer, in
this model, is Hobs = L2 (R+ ), where R+ is the half-line q ≥ 0. We could also endow the
observer with additional degrees of freedom, but this would not change anything essential
in what follows.
     We assume that the observer has access to any operator acting on Hobs . Therefore,
after including the observer, but prior to imposing the constraint, the algebra of observables
is A ⊗ B(L2 (R+ )), where B(L2 (R+ )) is the algebra of all (bounded) operators acting on
L2 (R+ ).
     Now we have to impose the constraint. The simplest model is to assume that the
appropriate constraint operator is simply the sum of the Hamiltonian H of de Sitter space
and the Hamiltonian of the observer:

                                        H
                                        b = H + Hobs = H + q.                                            (2.5)

This is a reasonable model in the limit GN → 0, though for GN > 0, one would expect
corrections involving positive powers of GN . In this model, the algebra of observables, after
imposing the constraint, is the H-invariant
                                 b           part of A ⊗ B(L2 (R+ )):

                                        Ab = (A ⊗ B(L2 (R+ ))H .                                         (2.6)
                                                             b



     It turns out that this is an interesting algebra. To analyze it, we will first ignore
the condition q ≥ 0 and study the case that q is real-valued, that is we consider the H-      b
                                           2
invariant part of the algebra A ⊗ B(L (R). Let p = −id/dq. We can construct by hand
some operators in A ⊗ B(L2 (R)) that commute with H.         b One such operator is q itself.
Moreover, for any a ∈ A, the operator eipH ae−ipH also commutes with H.          b We do not
include Hb itself because, as it is a constraint operator, it annihilates physical states. There
are no other obvious operators in A ⊗ B(L2 (R)) that commute with H,       b and a special case
of Takesaki duality [46] asserts that there are none.  5

     Thus the invariant algebra AH can be characterized as {eipH ae−ipH , q}, that is, the
                                       b

von Neumann algebra generated by operators eipH ae−ipH , a ∈ A, along with (bounded
functions of) q. This is actually a standard description of the “crossed product” of A
by the one-parameter automorphism group generated by H (see the description of AL in
section 3.1 of [26]), and in particular it is an algebra of Type II∞ . We will denote this
crossed product algebra as Acr . Note that Acr is defined without the constraint on the
observer energy. Conjugating by e−ipH leads to an equivalent description in which Acr is
generated by operators a and q − H. In this description, the inequality q ≥ 0 for positivity
   5
    Takesaki duality asserts an isomorphism between A ⊗ B(L2 (R)) and a certain “double crossed product”
algebra Adc . As in the text, first define the crossed product algebra Acr generated by operators eipH ae−ipH
and q. This algebra has an outer automorphism generated by p, so we can define a double crossed product
algebra Adc as the crossed product of the algebra Acr by the action of p. Adc is generated by Acr together
with x′ + p where [x′ , Acr ] = 0. The action of H + q on A ⊗ B(L2 (R)) is identified under Takesaki duality
with the action of translations of x′ on Adc . Since the invariant subalgebra of Adc under the latter action is
simply the original crossed product algebra Acr , we conclude that Acr ∼  = (A ⊗ B(L2 (R)))H . See Appendix
                                                                                            b

A for more background.




                                                   – 14 –
of the energy becomes q − H ≥ 0. In order to compare to formulas in [26], it is useful to
define x = −q. Then Acr is the algebra {a, H + x} generated by operators a ∈ A along
with H + x; it does not matter if we take H + x or −(H + x) as a generator of the algebra.
In this language, the constraint that the observer has nonnegative energy (which we have
not yet imposed) is
                                        H + x ≤ 0.                                   (2.7)
    The trace in the Type II∞ algebra Acr can be described as follows (see [26] for more
detail). In general, an element ba ∈ Acr is an A-valued function of H + x. But since
H|ΨdS ⟩ = 0, when we evaluate a matrix element ⟨ΨdS |b   a|ΨdS ⟩, we can set H = 0 and view
a as an A-valued function of x, which we will denote as a(x). The trace is then6
b
                                Z ∞
                         Tr b
                            a=       βdS dx eβdS x ⟨ΨdS |a(x)|ΨdS ⟩.                   (2.8)
                                           −∞

This is well-defined and satisfies Tr b abb = Tr b bb
                                                    a for a certain class of elements b   b ∈ Acr .
                                                                                       a, b
It is also positive in the sense that Tr b    †
                                             ab               a ̸= 0. But it is not well-defined
                                                a > 0 for all b
for all elements; for example, the trace of the identity element of Acr is divergent. The
reason that this happened is that we have implicitly assumed ΨdS to be independent of x.
However, a constant function on R is not square-integrable, so ΨdS extended in this way is
not an element of H ⊗ L2 (R). Thus the trace defined in eqn. (2.8) is not a “state” of Acr
but a “weight.” Here, a state on an algebra is a linear function b     a → F (b a) that is positive
in the sense that F (ba† b
                         a) ≥ 0 for all b
                                        a ̸= 0; a weight is precisely the same, except that it is
not defined for all elements of the algebra (it equals +∞ for some elements).
     Now we want to impose the constraint that q ≥ 0. To do this, let Θ(q) be the function
that is 1 for q ≥ 0 and 0 for q < 0. Multiplication by Θ(q) is a projection operator Π,
acting on H ⊗ L2 (R). We can incorporate the constraint by just replacing the algebra Acr
with
                                            Ab = ΠAcr Π.                                      (2.9)
In other words, the operators are the same as before, but restricted to act between states
that are in the image of Π. Ab can be viewed as a von Neumann algebra acting on the
Hilbert space Π(H ⊗ L2 (R)) = H ⊗ L2 (R+ ). Ab automatically comes with a trace, namely
the restriction of the trace on Acr to operators of the form Πb  aΠ.
     An infinite-dimensional von Neumann algebra that has a trace that takes a finite value
for the identity element is of Type II1 . So to show that Ab is of Type II1 , it suffices to show
that the trace in this algebra takes a finite value for the identity element. The identity
element of Ab corresponds to the element Π = Θ(q) = Θ(−H − x) of Acr , so we compute
                         Z ∞                                                  Z 0
                                         βdS x
 TrAb 1 = TrAcr Π =             βdS dx e         ⟨ΨdS |Θ(−H − x)|ΨdS ⟩ =             βdS dx eβdS x = 1. (2.10)
                           −∞                                                   −∞
   6
     This is essentially eqn. (3.39) in [26], but the variable called X in that equation is βdS x in eqn. (2.8). In
[26], the crossed product algebra was defined by adjoining Hmod + X to the bare algebra A, where Hmod is
the modular Hamiltonian. This is equivalent to adjoining (Hmod + X)/βdS = H + X/βdS . We have defined
the crossed product algebra by adjoining H + x, so the relation is X = βdS x.




                                                      – 15 –
Thus the algebra of observables in de Sitter space including the observer is of Type II1 ,
and moreover the trace that we have defined is normalized so that Tr 1 = 1.
     It is also true on very general grounds that Ab = ΠAcr Π is a factor, meaning that its
center consists only of the complex scalars. In general, if B is a von Neumann algebra that
is a factor and Π is a projection operator in B, then the von Neumann algebra ΠBΠ is also
a factor.7
     A Type II1 algebra that is “hyperfinite,” meaning that it can be approximated by
finite-dimensional matrix algebras, is isomorphic to the Murray-von Neumann algebra that
was described in section 1.3. Algebras of local regions in quantum field theory – and their
crossed products with finite-dimensional automorphism groups — are believed to be always
hyperfinite. So we expect that Ab is isomorphic to the algebra, described in section 1.3,
that acts on an infinite collection of qubits in an almost maximally mixed state.
     As we explained in section 1.3, the trace in a Type II1 algebra is defined for all elements
of the algebra, and it is possible for a state of such an algebra to introduce density matrices
and entropies that share many properties with density matrices and entropies in ordinary
quantum mechanics. We also explained that a Type II1 algebra has a state of maximum
entropy, namely the state with density matrix ρ = 1.
     To understand what is the state of maximum entropy in the case of the algebra A,       b we
can compute expectation values in this state. First consider an operator a ∈ A. For ρ = 1,
the expectation value of a is
                                 Z 0
                  Tr aρ = Tr a =       βdS dx eβdS x ⟨ΨdS |a|ΨdS ⟩ = ⟨ΨdS |a|ΨdS ⟩.        (2.11)
                                     −∞

On the other hand, consider an operator of the form G(−H − x), where G is some bounded
function. Bearing in mind that H|ΨdS ⟩ = 0, ⟨ΨdS |ΨdS ⟩ = 1, and x = −q, we get
                                 Z 0                                     Z ∞
Tr G(−H−x)ρ = Tr G(−H−x) =            βdS dxeβdS x ⟨ΨdS |G(−H−x)|ΨdS ⟩ =     βdS dq e−βdS q G(q).
                                          −∞                                           0
                                                                                    (2.12)
Thus we can think of the maximum entropy state as the ordinary de Sitter state ΨdS of
the quantum fields, tensored with a thermal energy distribution p(q) = βdS e−βdS q for the
observer. More formally, the maximum entropy state has the following purification: the
Hilbert space is H ⊗ L2 (R− ) (where R− is the half-line x ≤ 0 and Ab acts as described
earlier), and the state is                 p
                               Ψmax = ΨdS βdS eβdS x/2 .                            (2.13)
We will discuss this purification further in section 4. Since the maximally entropic state
has density matrix ρmax = 1, we have for any x ∈ Ab

                                Tr x = Tr xρmax = ⟨Ψmax |x|Ψmax ⟩.                                (2.14)
   7
    The algebra ΠBΠ acts on ΠH, and its center is the intersection of ΠBΠ with its commutant. It is
shown in [47], in statement EP7) proved on p. 21, that the commutant of ΠBΠ is ΠB′ , where B′ is the
commutant of B in H. So the center of ΠBΠ is the intersection of ΠBΠ with ΠB′ . If B is a factor, which
means that the intersection of B and B′ consists only of C, then the intersection of ΠBΠ and ΠB′ consists
only of multiples of the identity of ΠBΠ, and therefore ΠBΠ is a factor.




                                                – 16 –
                                                            1
     Rényi entropies can be defined as usual as Sα (ρ) = 1−α log Tr ρα . Clearly, all Rényi
entropies vanish for the maximally entropic state with ρ = 1; thus, this state is analogous
to a state in ordinary quantum mechanics that has a flat entanglement spectrum, and
therefore has Rényi entropies that are independent of α. That the state ΨdS has a flat
entanglement spectrum was argued by Dong, Silverstein, and Torroba via a Euclidean
path integral and a replica trick [22]. Their reasoning can be extended to include the
observer, as we discuss in section 4.
     The flat entanglement spectrum also implies that after coupling to gravity, the sup-
pression of fluctuations in de Sitter space can be understood purely in entropic terms, as
advocated in [10, 11, 14]. Let Λ ∈ Ab be a projection operator, and suppose that the ob-
server performs an experiment in which the possible outcomes correspond to Λ and 1 − Λ.
In the maximally entropic state with density matrix ρ = 1, the probability of the outcome
corresponding to Λ is pΛ = Tr Λ. After that outcome is observed, the system can be de-
scribed by the density matrix ρΛ = Λ/Tr Λ. The von Neumann entropy of the new density
matrix is S(ρΛ ) = −Tr ρΛ log ρΛ = − log(1/Tr Λ), as computed in section 1.3. S(ρΛ ) is the
same as the entropy deficit ∆SΛ = S(ρΛ ) − S(ρ) associated with the observed outcome,
since S(ρ) = 0. Thus we have arrived at a rather abstract explanation of the relation

                                         pΛ = e∆SΛ                                     (2.15)

that was claimed in [10, 14].
    After incorporating the observer and imposing the constraints, an operator a is replaced
                       a = ΠeipH ae−ipH Π, where Π = Θ(q) is the projection operator onto
by its dressed version b
states in which the observer energy is non-negative. The expectation value of b     a in the
maximum entropy state Ψmax is the same as the expectation value of a in the de Sitter
state ΨdS :

                      a|Ψmax ⟩ = ⟨Ψmax |ΠeipH ae−ipH Π|Ψmax ⟩ = ⟨ΨdS |a|ΨdS ⟩,
               ⟨Ψmax |b                                                                (2.16)

since HΨmax = 0 and ΠΨmax = Ψmax . Note that here a is a completely general element
of the algebra of observables, not necessarily a local operator. For example, a can be a
product of local operators at different times, a = a1 (t1 )a2 (t2 ) · · · an (tn ).

2.5   What Is An Observer?
Introducing an observer was necessary to give a sensible result in the preceding analysis, but
may seem artificial. In a satisfactory theory, we are not entitled to introduce an observer
from outside. The observer should be described by the theory.
     Our requirement for what an observer should be is quite minimal. The role of the
observer was to help us fix the time translation symmetry of de Sitter space, so an observer
is any system that can tell time. We chose a simple model in which a complete set of
commuting observables in the observer’s Hilbert space is the Hamiltonian Hobs = q. This
is not necessary; we could endow the observer with additional operators that commute with
Hobs . In fact, our model was unrealistically simple; in a more realistic model, we would at
least want to describe the position of the observer in de Sitter space. However, endowing




                                           – 17 –
the observer with operators that commute with Hobs would not affect the analysis in an
interesting way. Such operators would just go along for the ride.
     One can explain as follows the role of the observer in our analysis. Let H     b be the
Hilbert space of de Sitter space after imposing the gravitational constraints, as reviewed
in Appendix B. This Hilbert space exists, and there are operators that act on it. But no
operators on Hb can be defined just in the static patch. Therefore, rather than all of H,
                                                                                       b one
considers a “code subspace” consisting of states in Hb in which the static patch contains an
observer with some assumed properties. There are operators in the static patch that are
well-defined on the code subspace, though these operators are not well-defined on all of H.
What we have studied is the algebra of operators in the static patch that act on such a
code subspace.
     For a rather non-minimal model of an observer in de Sitter space, we could take the
Local Group of galaxies that are gravitationally bound to the Milky Way. Assuming that
the accelerating expansion of the present universe is the beginning of a phase of exponential
expansion in de Sitter space, within roughly 1011 years galaxies that are not gravitationally
bound to the Milky Way will be behind a cosmological horizon. The Local Group will
persist, with only relatively slow changes, for a time vastly longer than the time scale of
the de Sitter expansion. An analysis similar to what we have presented (but taking into
account the many degrees of freedom of the Local Group) is applicable to a code subspace
of states in which the Local Group is present in de Sitter space.
     A minimal modification of the model would be to give the observer a mass m ≫ TdS ,
and replace q ≥ 0 with q ≥ m. This, together with appropriate boundary conditions, would
give a rationale for assuming that the observer worldline is localized along the geodesic at
the center of the static patch. The algebra of observables is still of Type II1 .

2.6   Gravitational Dressing, and Giving the Observer an Orthonormal Frame
The algebra Ab that we have defined for the static patch with an observer present might be
described as an algebra of gravitationally dressed operators. In the static patch of de Sitter
space, there is no region at spatial infinity to which an operator could be gravitationally
dressed, so instead Ab is an algebra of operators that have been gravitationally dressed to
the observer.
    We only discussed explicitly the group Rt of time translations of the static patch,
and we have not taken into account the second factor in the static patch symmetry group
GP = Rt × SO(D − 1). This second factor is the rotation group of the static patch. Since
the group SO(D − 1) is compact, imposing SO(D − 1) as a group of constraints simply
means requiring that operators should be SO(D − 1)-invariant. Though there is nothing
wrong with this, one loses a great deal of information if one is only able to gravitationally
dress the rotation-invariant operators. As an alternative, we could equip the observer with
an orthonormal frame, as well as a Hamiltonian. At the classical level, this means that
the phase space of the observer would be not T ∗ R+ , where R+ is the half-line q ≤ 0,
but T ∗ R+ × T ∗ SO(D − 1). With such a model of the observer, we would be able to
gravitationally dress all operators in the static patch, not just the ones of zero angular
momentum. The resulting algebra is still of Type II1 .




                                           – 18 –
     In case the observer is the Local Group of galaxies, as discussed in section 2.5, this
step is unnecessary as the Local Group is not invariant under any nontrivial rotations, so
arbitrary operators in the static patch could be gravitationally dressed to the Local Group.
     Equipping the observer with an orthonormal frame, or some other mechanism that
breaks the rotation symmetry, is actually important in section 3, because we will assume
that all operators in A, not just the ones that commute with rotations, can be gravitation-
ally dressed to the observer. Otherwise we would not get the standard relative entropy.
However, for simplicity, the analysis in section 3 is written without introducing an explicit
symmetry-breaking mechanism.

3       A Bulk Formula For The Entropy

We have argued that the operators accessible to an observer in de Sitter space form a
von Neumann algebra Ab of Type II1 . To a state of such an algebra, one can associate an
entropy. The goal of the present section is to describe a bulk formula for the entropy of a
state of Ab that is semiclassical in a sense that we will describe. (This discussion is in close
parallel with a treatment of the black hole in a companion paper [32].)
     As in section 2.4, Ab = ΠAcr Π, where Acr is the crossed product algebra generated by
A and H + x and Π is the projection operator Π = Θ(−H − x). Acr can act on the Hilbert
space Hb = Π(H ⊗ L2 (R)), where A, H act on H and x acts on L2 (R). We will explain in
section 4 that every state of the algebra Ab – that is, every density matrix ρ ∈ Ab – can be
purified by a pure state in H.b (We will also explain a natural setup in which H  b emerges as
the space of physical states.) For now, we can just think of a choice of a state Φ  b ∈H b as a
convenient way to describe a state of the algebra A.  b
        We will consider states of the form

                                             b = Φ ⊗ f (x),
                                             Φ                                                        (3.1)

with Φ ∈ H, f (x) ∈ L2 (R). Because of the projection operator Π, it is natural to assume
that the function f (x) has support for x < 0. We assume a normalization condition
                                                    Z 0
                                     ⟨Φ|Φ⟩ = 1 =           dx |f (x)|2 .                              (3.2)
                                                      −∞

We want to impose a further condition on f that will ensure roughly that the full spacetime,
including the observer, is a definite semiclassical spacetime in which, when a given event
is occurring, the observer’s clock shows a well-defined time, with the uncertainty in time
being much less than βdS . We recall that, before conjugation by e−ipH , the Hamiltonian
of the observer is Hobs = q = −x. Prior to imposing the constraint q ≥ 0, there is a
self-adjoint operator p conjugate to q with [p, q] = −i, so i[Hobs , p] = −1. This tells us that
−p is the time told by the observer’s clock; since [e−ipH , p] = 0, this continues to be true in
the conjugated description.8 We would like the observer to be able to measure the times
    8
    Once one takes into account the constraint q ≥ 0, a self-adjoint operator p obeying [p, q] = −i does not
exist, so quantum mechanically, a clock whose energy is bounded below cannot tell time perfectly. But it




                                                  – 19 –
at which events occur in de Sitter space with a precision much greater than the natural de
Sitter time scale βdS . For this, the function f (x) should be slowly varying. We choose

                                    f (x) = ϵ1/2 g(ϵx),     ϵ ≪ βdS .                                (3.3)

where g(x) is a smooth, bounded function with support for x < 0 and ϵ is a small parameter.
                                        R0
We assume a normalization condition −∞ dx |f (x)|2 = 1. In a state of this kind, p ≈ 0,
with an uncertainty of order ϵ. After this state evolves for a time t with Hamiltonian
Hobs = q, it has p ≈ −t, with the same uncertainty. Such a function f (x) is mostly
supported for x ∼ −1/ϵ ≪ 0, and hence Φ ⊗ f (x) is approximately invariant under the
projection operator Π = Θ(−H − x). So we can view Φ         b = Φ ⊗ f (x) as an element of
               2
H = Π(H ⊗ L (R)).
 b
    An important and slightly perplexing detail is that the maximum entropy state Ψmax =
       √
ΨdS ⊗ βdS eβdS x/2 is not a semi-classical state in this sense; in this state, p has an uncer-
tainty of order βdS . The following analysis of the density matrix of a state of the form Φ b
therefore does not apply to Ψmax . (The density matrix of Ψmax is the identity operator, as
explained in section 2.4.)
     To compute the entropy of the state Φ,b we will first find an approximate formula for
its density matrix ρΦb and then evaluate the von Neumann entropy S(ρΦb ) = −Tr ρΦb log ρΦb .
Let ΨdS ∈ H be the natural Bunch-Davies state, and let ∆ΨdS : H → H be its modular
operator for the algebra A. To slightly shorten the formulas in the following derivation,
we will write just Ψ and β for ΨdS and βdS .
     We have ∆Ψ = e−hΨ where hΨ (which was called Hmod in section (2.2)) is often called
the modular Hamiltonian. We will also need the corresponding relative modular operator
∆Φ|Ψ : H → H for the algebra A and the states Φ and Ψ. This operator is defined by
            †
∆Φ|Ψ = SΦ|Ψ   SΦ|Ψ , where SΦ|Ψ is the relative Tomita operator, which is antilinear and
satisfies SΦ|Ψ aΨ = a† Φ, for a ∈ A. From this it follows that9
                     †                   †
  ⟨Ψ|∆Φ|Ψ a|Ψ⟩ = ⟨Ψ|SΦ|Ψ SΦ|Ψ a|Ψ⟩ = ⟨Ψ|SΦ|Ψ a† |Φ⟩ = ⟨Φ|a† |Φ⟩ = ⟨Φ|a|Φ⟩,                 a ∈ A. (3.4)

We write ∆Φ|Ψ = e−hΦ|Ψ , where hΦ|Ψ is the relative modular Hamiltonian.
   The desired density matrix ρΦb is supposed to satisfy

                                      ⟨Φ|b
                                       b a|Φ⟩
                                           b = Tr ρ b b
                                                   Φ
                                                         a ∈ A.
                                                      a, b   b                                       (3.5)

           a = ⟨Ψmax |ρΦb b
But Tr ρΦb b              a|Ψmax ⟩, according to eqn. (2.14). So the condition we want is

                                               a|Ψmax ⟩ = ⟨Φ|b
                                    ⟨Ψmax |ρΦb b           b a|Φ⟩.
                                                               b                                     (3.6)

There is an obvious similarity between eqns. (3.4) and (3.6), suggesting that ρΦb can
be constructed in a simple way by modifying ∆Φ|Ψ to include x. In doing so, we have to
can tell time very well, for a long period. For example, p can be defined for states whose support is away
from q = 0, so p is approximately well-defined for any state that is supported mostly away from q = 0, such
as the states considered in the text.
                      †
   9
     In the step ⟨Ψ|SΦ|Ψ a† |Φ⟩ = ⟨Φ|a† |Φ⟩, we use the fact that SΦ|Ψ is antilinear and SΦ|Ψ |Ψ⟩ = |Φ⟩.




                                                 – 20 –
remember that as well as satisfying (3.6), ρΦb is supposed to be an element of Ab (or possibly
an unbounded operator affiliated to A,   b meaning that bounded functions of ρ b are in A).
                                                                                  Φ
                                                                                              b
The operator x is not an element of A,  b but a general bounded function of x + hΨ /β is in A. b
Also, ∆Φ|Ψ itself is not affiliated to A,
                                       b but as we will discuss shortly, e−βx ∆Φ|Ψ is affiliated
to A.
   b
    Taking these facts into account, one can find an approximation to the density matrix:
                            1
                    ρΦb =     f (x + hΨ /β)e−βx ∆Φ|Ψ f (x + hΨ /β) + O(ϵ).                (3.7)
                            β
First of all, the operator O = f (x + hΨ /β)e−βx ∆Φ|Ψ f (x + hΨ /β) is manifestly self-adjoint
and non-negative. The operators f (x + hΨ /β), f (x + hΨ /β) are elements of A, b since they
are bounded functions of x + hΨ /β. We have

                               e−βx ∆Φ|Ψ = e−(βx+hΨ )+(hΨ −hΦ|Ψ ) .                       (3.8)

One term in the exponent is the algebra generator βx + hΨ . To understand the other term,
we use the Connes cocycle, defined as
                                                −is  is −is
                               uΦ|Ψ (s) = ∆is
                                           Φ|Ψ ∆Ψ = ∆Φ ∆Ψ|Φ .                             (3.9)

The important properties of uΦ|Ψ (s) for our purposes are that for real s it is valued in
A, and that the two formulas for uΦ|Ψ (s) are in fact equal. See for example section 6
of [48]. Differentiating the first formula for uΦ|Ψ (s) with respect to s at s = 0, we learn
that hΨ − hΦ|Ψ is affiliated to A. So the operator in eqn. (3.8) is affiliated with A.
                                                                                     b The
equivalence between the two formulas in eqn. (3.9) implies, again by differentiating with
respect to s at s = 0, that
                                    hΦ|Ψ − hΨ = hΦ − hΨ|Φ .                           (3.10)
    In verifying eqn. (3.6), we will make use of the fact that f (x) is slowly varying, which
implies that f (x + hΨ /β) approximately commutes with ∆Φ|Ψ . Hence instead of eqn. (3.7),
we can equivalently write
                                    1
                            ρΦb =     |f (x + hΨ /β)|2 e−βx ∆Φ|Ψ + O(ϵ).                 (3.11)
                                    β
                                          a = aeiu(βx+hΨ ) , a ∈ A, u ∈ R, since any element of
     It suffices to verify eqn. (3.6) for b
Ab can be approximated by a sum of such operators. We have chosen the state f (x) of the
observer’s clock so that |p| ≲ ϵ. But multiplication by eiuβx shifts p by −uβ. As a result,
the left and right hand sides of eqn. (3.6) vanish exponentially unless |u| ≲ ϵ/β, so we can
restrict to that range of u. We have
                                     Z 0
                          ⟨Φ|b
                            b a|Φ⟩ =
                                b          dx |f (x)|2 ⟨Φ|aeiu(hΨ +βx) |Φ⟩.              (3.12)
                                        −∞

For |u| ≲ ϵ/β, we can drop the factor eiuhΨ , with an error of order ϵ. Once this is done,
the integrand in eqn. (3.12) involves a matrix element ⟨Φ|a|Φ⟩ with a ∈ A. Hence we can
use eqn. (3.4), giving
                                  Z 0
                       ⟨Φ|b
                        b a|Φ⟩
                            b =        dx |f (x)|2 eiuβx ⟨Ψ|∆Φ|Ψ a|Ψ⟩.              (3.13)
                                        −∞




                                               – 21 –
Since hΨ |Ψ⟩ = 0, we can move any function of x inside the matrix element and replace x
by x + hΨ /β:
                              Z 0
                    ⟨Φ|b
                     b a|Φ⟩ =
                         b        dx Ψ |f (x + hΨ /β)|2 ∆Φ|Ψba Ψ .               (3.14)
                                 −∞

Multiplying and dividing by βeβx , we get
                          Z 0                                      
                                       1
               ⟨Φ|b
                b a|Φ⟩
                    b =      dx βeβx Ψ |f (x + hΨ /β)|2 e−βx ∆Φ|Ψb
                                                                 a Ψ                            (3.15)
                          −∞           β
                                                              
                                 1            2 −βx
                        = Ψmax |f (x + hΨ /β)| e    ∆Φ|Ψba Ψmax .
                                 β
Comparing to eqn. (3.11), this establishes the claimed formula for the density matrix.
    The entropy is S(ρΦb ) = −Tr ρΦb log ρΦb = −⟨Φ|
                                                 b log ρ b |Φ⟩.
                                                        Φ
                                                            b Because f (x) is slowly varying
and supported mostly at large |x|, in evaluating log ρΦb , we can approximate f (x + hΨ /β)
by f (x). We get then

                         − log ρΦb = hΦ|Ψ + βx − log |f (x)|2 + log β.                          (3.16)

The entropy then is
                                        Z 0
              S(ρΦb ) = ⟨Φ|hΦ|Ψ |Φ⟩ +         dx|f (x)|2 (βx − log |f (x)|2 + log β).           (3.17)
                                         −∞
                                                       Z 0
                      = ⟨Φ|hΦ|Ψ |Φ⟩ + ⟨Φ|βx|
                                       b     Φ⟩
                                             b +             dx|f (x)|2 (− log |f (x)|2 + log β).
                                                        −∞

It is convenient, however, to use the identity of eqn. (3.10). Since ⟨Φ|hΦ |Φ⟩ = 0, we get
                                              Z 0
    S(ρΦb ) = −⟨Φ|hΨ|Φ |Φ⟩ + ⟨Φ|h
                              b Ψ + βx|Φ⟩b +        dx|f (x)|2 (− log |f (x)|2 + log β). (3.18)
                                                   −∞

    We now want to show that this formula, which has been derived based on rather
abstract considerations, agrees with what one would expect from gravity. To be more
precise, since the entropy of a Type II1 algebra is a renormalized entropy whose definition
involves a subtraction, we will only reproduce the expected results from gravity up to an
overall additive constant, independent of the state. One can think of this constant as the
entropy of the maximum entropy state, which in the Type II1 algebra is defined to be 0.
    First of all, following Bekenstein [1], the generalized entropy of a horizon is defined as
                                                A
                                     Sgen =        + Sout ,                                     (3.19)
                                               4GN
where A is the horizon area and Sout is the entropy of the fields exterior to the horizon. To
be more exact, one can evaluate this formula for any spacelike surface that is a codimension
1 “cut” of the horizon. Sgen is then supposed to be the entropy (including gravitational
entropy) of the region exterior to (and spacelike separated from) the given cut. In the case
of de Sitter space, if we choose the cut to be the “bifurcate horizon” B (the intersection
of past and future horizons, sketched in fig. 2), then Sgen is expected to be the entropy of




                                              – 22 –
Figure 2. In this diagram, the “exterior” region for a given cut of the future horizon is the region
to the right of, and spacelike separated from, the given cut. In the case of a cut along the surface
B – the intersection of the past and future horizons of the static patch P – the exterior region is
simply P . What is exterior to a later cut of the future horizon is a smaller spacetime region, such
as the example shaded in black.


the static patch. If we choose a later cut, then Sgen is an entropy of a smaller spacetime
region, as also illustrated in the figure.
    The generalized entropy for different horizon cuts can be compared by an elegant
formula [33]. A particularly simple and useful case of this formula compares Sgen (B), the
generalized entropy of the bifurcate horizon B, to Sgen (∞), the limit of the generalized
entropy as the horizon cut goes to future infinity. In this case, the formula reads10

                                    Sgen (B) = Sgen (∞) − Srel (Φ||Ψ).                       (3.20)

Here Srel (Φ||Ψ) is the relative entropy between a state Φ of the bulk fields and the natural
de Sitter state Ψ = ΨdS . The state ΨdS (or the Hartle-Hawking state, in the case of a black
hole) enters the derivation because its modular Hamiltonian generates time translations,
which act as boosts of the horizon, leaving fixed the cut B.
    To compare these formulas, the first step is to observe that one term in eqn. (3.17) is
the relative entropy in eqn. (3.20):

                            −Srel (Φ||Ψ) = ⟨Φ| log ∆Ψ|Φ |Φ⟩ = −⟨Φ|hΨ|Φ |Φ⟩.                  (3.21)

This is indeed Araki’s formula for relative entropy in the general context of von Neumann
algebras [50]. In the present discussion, Φ and Ψ are states of the underlying Type III1
algebra A of quantum fields in de Sitter space, and Araki’s formula for relative entropy
is essentially the only one available. In the more familiar case of an algebra of Type
I, with states Ψ, Φ corresponding respectively to density matrices σ, ρ, one can show that
  10
       We elaborate upon the derivation of this formula in a companion paper [32].




                                                   – 23 –
−⟨Φ| log ∆Ψ|Φ |Φ⟩ = Tr ρ log ρ−Tr ρ log σ, where the last formula is a possibly more familiar
definition of relative entropy.11
     So to reconcile our formula (3.18) with the expected result (3.20), we need
                                      Z 0
               ?
       Sgen (∞) = ⟨Φ|h
                   b Ψ + βx|Φ⟩
                            b +             dx|f (x)|2 (− log |f (x)|2 + log β) + constant,        (3.22)
                                       −∞

where we include in the formula an additive constant which is not captured by the Type
II1 algebra. Of course, the generalized entropy in the far future is supposed to be

                                                 A(∞)
                                   Sgen (∞) =         + Sout (∞),                                  (3.23)
                                                 4GN

where A(∞) and Sout (∞) are the horizon area and the entropy outside the horizon in the
far future.
     Because of the exponential expansion of de Sitter space, typical perturbations cross the
horizon and disappear from the static patch in a time of order β. Hence after a few times
β, the static patch contains an observer in empty de Sitter space. It follows that Sout (∞)
is just the entropy of the observer. In our model, we have attributed to the observer
no property except an energy, and therefore the entropy of the observer comes only from
                                                   R0
fluctuations in energy. We can interpret the term −∞ dx|f (x)|2 (− log |f (x)|2 +log β) on the
right hand side of eqn. (3.22) as the entropy in the observer’s energy fluctuations. The time
at which this entropy is measured does not matter, since in the model, the observer energy
                                                         R0
Hobs = q = −x is a conserved quantity. So we identify −∞ dx|f (x)|2 (− log |f (x)|2 + log β)
as Sout (∞).
     It remains to understand the term ⟨Φ|h
                                          b Ψ +βx|Φ⟩ b in the formula for the entropy. Recall
that the conjugation by e  −ipH mapped Hobs = q = −x to −x − H. It follows that

                                    ⟨Φ|h      b = −β⟨Hobs ⟩.
                                     b Ψ + βx|Φ⟩                                                   (3.24)

To complete the analysis, one needs the fact that the presence in the center of the static
patch of an object of energy E, assuming that E is small enough that one can work to
linear order in E, reduces Ahor /4GN , where Ahor is the area of the cosmological horizon, by
βE [14]. In four dimensions, for example, the Schwarzschild-de Sitter metric for the case of
                                                                               1
an object of energy E at the center of the static patch is ds2 = −f (r)dt2 + f (r) dr2 + r2 dΩ2 ,
with
                                              2GE      r2
                                  f (r) = 1 −       − 2 ,                                 (3.25)
                                                 r     rdS
where the de Sitter radius is rdS = β/2π. The cosmological horizon is at the zero of f (r)
that approaches rdS for E → 0. This is at

                                     rhor = rdS − GE + O(E 2 ).                                    (3.26)
  11
    The equivalence of the two formulas for relative entropy in the case of an algebra of Type I is shown,
for example, in section 4.3 of [49]. (See footnote 16 of that paper for the conventions used there for the
relative modular operator.)




                                                 – 24 –
                              2 , so
The horizon area is Ahor = 4πrhor

                 Ahor  πr2                     πr2
                      = dS − 2πErdS + O(E 2 ) = dS − βE + O(E 2 ).                      (3.27)
                 4GN   GN                      GN
This shows the claimed shift −β⟨Hobs ⟩ in the entropy of the horizon due to an object at
the center of the static patch.
    We can therefore interpret the term −β⟨Φ|q|
                                            b Φ⟩b = −β⟨Hobs ⟩ in eqn. (3.22) as Ahor /4GN
or more precisely as the shift in Ahor /4GN due to the presence of the observer.

4     Hilbert Spaces

4.1    More On Type II Algebras and Hilbert Spaces
We have described an algebra AP of observables that governs the experiences of an observer
in the static patch P of de Sitter space. From the point of view of an observer in P , the
state of the universe is entirely summarized by a density matrix ρ ∈ AP . This observer
has no way to know what there is outside of P .
     However, if we make a global model of the whole de Sitter space X, then we can
construct a Hilbert space H  b that describes the whole universe. This will give a purification
of the density matrix ρ. In general, a state Ψ ∈ H  b governs observations both in the static
patch P and in the complementary static patch P ′ . In this section, we will analyze the
Hilbert spaces that result from different assumptions about what is in the patch P ′ .
     But first we will make a few general remarks about Hilbert space representations and
density matrices. As a preliminary, instead of the two static patches P and P ′ , let us
consider ordinary quantum systems A and B with Hilbert spaces HA and HB that are
respectively of dimension n and m. The combined system AB has a tensor product Hilbert
space HAB = HA ⊗HB of dimension nm. If and only if n = m, any density matrix of either
system is the reduced density matrix of a pure state of the combined system. If n > m,
then any density matrix of system B can be realized by a pure state of the combined
system, but this is not true for system A. For n > m, the maximum entropy of a density
matrix of system A that comes from a pure state of the combined system is log m. This is
less than the entropy log n of a maximally mixed state of system A by an “entropy deficit”
∆S = log n − log m = log 1/d, where d = m/n. If instead d > 1, the roles of systems A
and B are reversed, and B has an entropy deficit log d.
     All of this has a precise analog for an algebra A of Type II1 . The role of d is played by
the “continuous dimension” of Murray and von Neumann, which as explained in section
1.3 classifies the representations of A on a Hilbert space. Here d is a positive real number
or infinity. When A acts on a Hilbert space, its commutant A′ is of Type II1 unless d = ∞,
in which case it is Type II∞ .
     For d = 1, we can assume that the Hilbert space H is a copy of the algebra A itself.
The inner product on H is defined by (x, y) = Tr x† y, for x, y ∈ H. The action of A on H is
described by x → ax, for a ∈ A, x ∈ H. The commutant of A is another algebra A′ that can
be described as follows. For any a ∈ A, there is an element a′ ∈ A′ , acting on H by right
multiplication, x → xa′ . (A′ is actually the “opposite algebra” to A, with multiplication in




                                            – 25 –
the opposite order: (ab)′ = b′ a′ .) Let Ψ ∈ H be any pure state. To find the reduced density
matrix ρ for the algebra A, we compute (Ψ|a|Ψ) = (Ψ, aΨ) = Tr Ψ† aΨ = Tr aΨΨ† , where
we used the cyclic property of the trace. So ρ = ΨΨ† . Similarly we can find the density
matrix of the same state for the algebra A′ . In this case, (Ψ|a′ |Ψ) = (Ψ|Ψa′ ) = Tr Ψ† Ψa
and therefore the density matrix is σ = Ψ† Ψ.
     The formulas ρ = ΨΨ† , σ = Ψ† Ψ show that by taking Ψ = ρ1/2 or Ψ = σ 1/2 , we can
get an arbitrary density matrix ρ or σ of algebra A or algebra A′ as the reduced density
matrix of a pure state Ψ ∈ H. The same formulas also imply that Tr ρn = Tr σ n , for any
n, so the von Neumann and Rényi entropies of ρ and σ are always equal. All this is as in
ordinary quantum mechanics.
     To get a Hilbert space representation of A with d < 1, we can pick a projection operator
Π ∈ A of trace d. Then, viewing Π an an element of A′ , we project onto the subspace
HΠ ⊂ H consisting of states ΨΠ, Ψ ∈ H. The algebra A acts on the left on HΠ as before.
Its commutant consists of operators Πa′ Π, acting on the right by ΨΠ → ΨΠa′ Π. These
operators make an algebra Ae′ = ΠA′ Π, which is also of Type II1 . The element Π ∈ A′ is
the identity in Ae′ . It is usual in an algebra of Type II1 to define a normalized trace such
that the trace of the identity element is 1. For the algebra Ae′ , the normalized trace is

                                 f Πa′ Π =    1
                                 Tr               Tr Πa′ Π.                             (4.1)
                                             Tr Π

Clearly Tr
         f Π = 1.
    An example of a normalized state in HΠ is Ψ = Π/(Tr Π)1/2 . Using the property
Π2 = Π of a projection operator, one finds that the density matrix of algebra A for this
state is ρ = ΨΨ† = Π/Tr Π. The entropy of this density matrix is

                            S(ρ) = − log(1/Tr Π) = − log(1/d),                          (4.2)

as we computed in section 1.3. The normalized density matrix of the same state for the
algebra Ae′ is simply σ = Π, with entropy

                                  S(σ) = −Tr
                                          f σ log σ = 0.                                (4.3)

Thus, as in ordinary quantum mechanics, for d < 1, there is a pure state of the system,
namely Π ∈ HΠ, which has maximum entropy for the second algebra Ae′ , but has an
entropy deficit log(1/d) for A.
    Now let us consider a general state Ψ = xΠ ∈ HΠ, with x ∈ A. For Ψ to be normalized,
we need
                                   (Ψ, Ψ) = Tr x† xΠ = 1.                          (4.4)
By similar calculations to those that we have already considered, the density matrix of the
state Ψ for the algebra A is ρ = xΠx† , which satisfies (Ψ|a|Ψ) = Tr aρ, for all a ∈ A. For
Πa′ Π ∈ Ae′ , we get (Ψ|Πa′ Π|Ψ) = Tr Πx† xΠa′ = Tr Π Trf Πx† xΠa′ . Therefore the density
                               ′
matrix of the same state for Ae is

                                     σ = (Tr Π)Πx† xΠ.                                  (4.5)




                                           – 26 –
These formulas for ρ and σ lead to Tr σ n = (Tr Π)n Tr ρn for any n, and therefore Tr
                                                                                   f σn =
(Tr Π)n−1 Tr ρn . Differentiating with respect to n at n = 1 to compute S(ρ) = −Tr ρ log ρ,
S(σ) = −Tr
         f σ log σ, we get

                       S(ρ) = S(σ) − log(1/Tr Π) = S(σ) − log(1/d).                       (4.6)

We already know that the state Ψ = Π has the maximum entropy of any state in HΠ for the
algebra Ae′ , namely 0, so this formula shows that the same state has the maximum entropy
of any state in HΠ for the algebra A, namely − log 1/d. Thus, similarly to what happened
in ordinary quantum mechanics, the maximum entropy state in HΠ has an entropy deficit
log 1/d for the algebra A.
     As in ordinary quantum mechanics, exchanging the two algebras A and A′ has the
same effect as replacing d with 1/d, so we will not consider separately the case d > 1.
     The case that is symmetrical between the two algebras is d = 1. This suggests that
if we place in P ′ an observer identical to the observer in P , we might get a Hilbert space
representation with d = 1. We will begin with this case, and show that it does lead to
d = 1. As in the preceding discussion, examples with d ̸= 1 can then be constructed by
simply acting with a projection operator in one of the two algebras. The case that there is
no observer in P ′ turns out to be troublesome, and we will only be able to offer a conjecture
about what happens in this case.

4.2   An Observer in the Second Patch
In section 2.4, we started with a Hilbert space H that describes quantum fields in de Sitter
space, with the constraints ignored. The important constraint operator was the operator
H that generates future-directed time translations of the static patch P , and past-directed
time translations of the complementary patch P ′ . Then we introduced an observer in P
with canonical variables p, q, and a Hamiltonian Hobs = q, with q ≥ 0. We now extend this
construction to an identical observer in the complementary static patch P ′ . This observer
has canonical variables p′ , q ′ and Hamiltonian Hobs
                                                    ′  = q ′ , again with q ′ ≥ 0. The combined
Hilbert space, ignoring the Hamiltonian constraint, is therefore now H ⊗ Hobs ⊗ Hobs        ′ ,
                                                                         ′    ′
where p, q act on the Hilbert space Hobs of the observer in P , and p , q act on the Hilbert
         ′
space Hobs   of the observer in P ′ . For example, we can represent q and q ′ as multiplication
operators and set p = −i∂/∂q, p′ = −i∂/∂q ′ , or we can represent p, p′ by multiplication
and q, q ′ by differentiation. We will, to begin with, ignore the conditions q, q ′ ≥ 0, and
impose those conditions at the end by acting on the Hilbert space and the algebras with
suitable projection operators.
     The constraint operator of the combined system is the total Hamiltonian of the bulk
system plus the two observers:

                            b = H + Hobs − H ′ = H + q − q ′ .
                            H                                                             (4.7)
                                            obs

The reason for the minus sign multiplying Hobs ′  is that H generates past-directed time
                           ′
translations in the patch P ; indeed, H is odd under the exchange of the two patches, and
the extended constraint operator H b has the same property.




                                            – 27 –
     We essentially already know from section 2.4 how to describe the algebras of the two
patches. The observer in patch P , if we ignore the constraint, has access to an algebra
A of operators on H, and also to the operators p, q on Hobs . The combined algebra is
A ⊗ B(Hobs ), where B(Hobs ) is the algebra of all bounded operators on Hobs . Taking the
constraint into account at the level of observables just means replacing A ⊗ B(Hobs ) with
its H-invariant
    b           part. Relative to section (2.4), the constraint now has an extra contribution
  ′
q , but since this operator commutes with A ⊗ B(Hobs ), that makes no difference. Hence
the invariant subalgebra of A ⊗ B(Hobs ) is the same as it was before; it is generated by
eipH ae−ipH for a ∈ A, along with q. Schematically, the invariant algebra is

                                 A∗P = {eipH ae−ipH , q},          a ∈ A.                        (4.8)

The reason for the ∗ in A∗P is that we have not yet imposed the conditions q, q ′ ≥ 0; when
those conditions are imposed, we will drop the ∗. The fact that A∗P is not affected by
the presence of an observer in the patch P ′ is a special case of the fact that an observer
in patch P does not know what is in P ′ . Similarly, before imposing the constraint, the
algebra of the complementary patch P ′ is A′ ⊗ B(Hobs     ′ ), where A′ is the commutant of A

acting on H. Imposing the constraint means replacing A′ ⊗ B(Hobs       ′ ) with its H-invariant
                                                                                     b
                              −ip ′ H ′ ip′ H    ′   ′              ′
part, which is generated by e        ae       , a ∈ A , along with q . Schematically
                                              ′        ′
                               A∗P ′ = {e−ip H a′ eip H , q ′ },   a′ ∈ A′ .                     (4.9)

The algebras A∗P and A∗P ′ obviously commute.
     However, we want to impose the constraint H            b not just on the operators but on the
Hilbert space H ⊗ Hobs ⊗ Hobs    ′ . It is straightforward to impose a compact group G of

constraints on a Hilbert space: one just restricts to the G-invariant subspace of Hilbert
space. However, that does not work well for constraints that generate a noncompact group.
To understand why, let us consider a simplified case in which the constraint that we wish
to impose is just q ′ . There is no Hilbert space of states annihilated by q ′ , since a state
annihilated by q ′ must be proportional to δ(q ′ ) and is not normalizable. Our problem is
not that different, because −H    b = e−ip′ (H+q) q ′ eip′ (H+q) is conjugate to q ′ . In the case of a
constraint H  b that generates a noncompact group (here the group of time translations of the
static patch), rather than requiring a physical state Ψ to satisfy HΨ      b = 0, it is often better
to impose an equivalence relation Ψ ∼  = Ψ+ Hχ b for any χ. The equivalence classes are called
coinvariants, and often one can define a Hilbert space of coinvariants even though there is
no Hilbert space of invariants. The space of coinvariants has a natural interpretation in
BRST quantization. This is discussed in detail in Appendix B, but for the present case of
a single constraint, we will give a brief explanation here. In the case of a single constraint
H,
 b the BRST complex is defined by introducing a single ghost operator c and a single
antighost operator b, satisfying c2 = b2 = 0, {c, b} = 1. These operators can be realized
on a pair of states | ↓⟩, | ↑⟩, respectively of ghost number 0 and 1, satisfying | ↑⟩ = c| ↓⟩,
| ↓⟩ = b| ↑⟩. The BRST operator is Q = cH.    b The BRST cohomology is defined as the space
of states Ψ b with QΨ b = 0 modulo the equivalence relation Ψ        b ∼
                                                                       =Ψ b + Qbχ. The cohomology
of ghost number 0 consists of states Ψ = Ψ| ↓⟩ annihilated by Q. The equivalence relation
                                        b




                                                  – 28 –
is vacuous for states of ghost number 0, since there are no states at ghost number −1. The
condition QΨ b = 0 is equivalent to HΨb = 0, so the BRST cohomology at ghost number 0 is
the space of invariants. At ghost number 1, we have Ψ    b = Ψ| ↑⟩ for some Ψ. The constraint
QΨ b = 0 is vacuous, since there are no states of ghost number 2, and the equivalence relation
b ∼
Ψ  =Ψ b + Qb χ becomes Ψ ∼  = Ψ + Hχ.
                                    b    So the BRST cohomology at ghost number 1 is the
space of coinvariants.
     The present problem is actually a typical example in which one wants to work with
the space of coinvariants. Represent p′ by multiplication, and q ′ by q ′ = i∂/∂p′ , and define
a map from H ⊗ Hobs ⊗ Hobs  ′  to H ⊗ Hobs as follows. View an element Ψ ∈ H ⊗ Hobs ⊗ Hobs  ′

as a function Ψ(p′ ) that is valued in H ⊗ Hobs . For such a Ψ, define T Ψ ∈ H ⊗ Hobs by
                                       Z ∞
                                                    ′
                                 TΨ =        dp′ eip (H+q) Ψ(p′ ).                       (4.10)
                                             −∞

Integration by parts shows that the map Ψ → T Ψ is invariant under Ψ → Ψ + Hχ,           b with
Hb = H + q − i∂/∂p′ . So T gives a map from the space of coinvariants to H ⊗ Hobs , and
this map is in fact an isomorphism. So the space of coinvariants can be identified with12
H ⊗ Hobs , and this is the desired Hilbert space H     b ∗ (on which we still have to impose
q, q ′ ≥ 0). Of course, we could have made a similar construction with the role of the two
observers exchanged, and then we would have identified H     b ∗ with H ⊗ H′ .
                                                                              obs
                                                    ∗        ∗
       It remains to determine how the algebras AP and AP ′ act on H    b ∗ . By definition, any
operator x in either A∗P or A∗P ′ commutes with H    b and therefore with the BRST operator
Q; hence x makes sense as an operator on the BRST cohomology at ghost number 1, and
therefore, on the space of coinvariants. Since we have identified the space of coinvariants
with H   b ∗ = H ⊗ Hobs via the map T , there is a unique operator bx on H b ∗ such that b xT Ψ =
T (xΨ), and this is the operator by which x acts on H . b ∗

       When we carry out this procedure for A∗P , nothing happens. T commutes with the
operators p, q, H, and a ∈ A from which A∗P is constructed. So as an algebra of operators
on H  b ∗ , A∗ = {eipH ae−ipH , q}, a ∈ A, exactly as in eqn. (4.9). What happens to A∗ ′ is
             P                                                                               P
more interesting, since the definition of A∗P ′ in eqn. (4.9) involves operators q ′ , p′ that are
eliminated when we identify H     b as H ⊗ Hobs . We find
                                              ′      ′
                                      T (e−ip H a′ eip H Ψ) = a′ T Ψ                                (4.11)

and
                                        T (q ′ Ψ) = (H + q)T Ψ.                                     (4.12)
                                 b A∗ ′ is generated by a′ ∈ A′ along with H + q:
So as an algebra of operators on H, P

                                   A∗P ′ = {a′ , H + q},       a′ ∈ A′ .                            (4.13)

What we have arrived at in eqns. (4.9) and (4.13) is the usual picture of two commuting
crossed product algebras acting on H⊗L2 (R), with q as a multiplication operator on L2 (R).
  12
    This explanation is slightly oversimplified. As in Appendix B, the coinvariants have to be defined in
a space of functions of p with compact support (or rapidly vanishing at infinity) rather than in a Hilbert
space, and after defining the space of coinvariants, one then takes a completion to get a Hilbert space. The
result of a more careful analysis is as stated in the text.




                                                  – 29 –
The same construction appears in analyzing a black hole [26]. We will reconsider the black
hole in section 5.
    As in section 2.4, to put A∗P in a standard form, we conjugate by e−ipH and define
x = −q, leading to
                              A∗P = {a, H + x},     a∈A                             (4.14)
and
                               A∗P ′ = {e−ipH a′ eipH , x},   a′ ∈ A′ .                        (4.15)
Here
                                            ∂      ∂
                                           p = −i
                                              =i .                                    (4.16)
                                           ∂q      ∂x
    We still have to impose the conditions q, q ′ ≥ 0, which now become H + x ≤ 0 and
x ≤ 0. So we introduce projection operators Π ∈ A∗P , Π′ ∈ A∗P ′ , defined by Π = Θ(−H −x),
Π′ = Θ(−x). Then finally we define the physical Hilbert space in the presence of observers
of nonnegative energy by projection
                                             H       b∗.
                                             b = ΠΠ′ H                                         (4.17)
Similarly the physical algebras of the two static patches are
                                AP = ΠA∗P Π,        AP ′ = Π′ A∗P ′ Π′ .                       (4.18)
The projection operators Π ∈ A∗P , Π′ ∈ A∗P ′ become the identity operators in AP , AP ′ .
      We already defined the algebra AP in section 2.4. We showed it to be of Type II1
and studied its normalized trace. Since the construction is symmetric between the two
algebras, AP ′ is also of Type II1 , and we expect that H          b has continuous dimension 1 as a
representation of AP or of AP ′ . This is equivalent to saying that the maximum entropy
state of either algebra, with density matrix 1, can be realized by a pure state Ψ ∈ H.         b The
                                              √      β    x/2
appropriate state, namely Ψmax = ΨdS βdS e             dS     Θ(−x), was already described in section
2.4 (eqn. (2.13)). The difference between the present discussion and the previous one is
that in section (2.4), H ⊗ L2 (R− ) = Π(H ⊗ Hobs ) was introduced arbitrarily as a Hilbert
space in which the maximum entropy density matrix of the algebra AP can be purified.
Now, instead, we have shown that after a further projection by Π′ , Π(H ⊗ Hobs ) becomes
the physical Hilbert space for the case that there are identical observers in the two patches.
The further projection by Π′ does not affect the analysis of the density matrix of the state
Ψmax for the algebra AP , since Π′ leaves Ψmax invariant and commutes with AP .
      As an interesting variant of this, we can consider the case that the complementary
patch P ′ contains an observer that is not isomorphic to the observer in P . As one simple
option, we can assume that the Hamiltonian Hobs         ′   = q ′ of the second observer is bounded in
the range a ≤ q ′ ≤ b. We do not have to assume that a ≥ 0, but it is physically natural to
do so. Moreover, in that case, the projection operator onto states with a ≤ q ′ ≤ b, namely
Π′[a,b] = Θ(b − q ′ )Θ(q ′ − a) = Θ(b + x)Θ(−x − a), is an element of the algebras AP ′ . The
computation of Tr Π′[a,b] proceeds precisely as in eqn. (2.10), except that the integral over
x goes over the range −b ≤ x ≤ −a:
                                        Z −a
                           Tr Π′[a,b] =      βdS dx eβdS x = e−βdS a − e−βdS b .                (4.19)
                                      −b




                                               – 30 –
This illustrates the assertion that a projection operator in a Type II1 algebra can have any
trace between 0 and 1, as discussed in section 1.3.
    In the presence of an observer in the patch P ′ with energy bounded in the range
a ≤ q ′ ≤ b, the Hilbert space becomes H  b[a,b] = Π Π′ H
                                                      [a,b]
                                                            b ∗ . The algebra AP is unaffected,
but we now have AP ′ = Π′ A∗ ′ Π′ . As a representation of AP , H
                           [a,b]   P   [a,b]
                                                                          b now has continuous
dimension d = Tr Π′[a,b] . As explained in section 4.1, the maximum possible entropy of a
pure state in H
              b[a,b] , given that this Hilbert space has continuous dimension d < 1 for the
algebra AP , is
                                       SP,max = − log(1/d)                              (4.20)
for the algebra AP , and SP ′ ,max = 0 for AP ′ . A normalized state that has the maximum
possible entropy for each algebra is
                                              1
                              Ψmax,[a,b] = q          Π′[a,b] Ψmax .                    (4.21)
                                                ′
                                            Tr Π[a,b]

    The physical meaning of the entropy reduction in the patch P is that as we have
removed some qubits from the patch P ′ , there is no state in H
                                                              b[a,b] that describes complete
entanglement of all degrees of freedom in P with anything in P ′ . On the other hand, the
the state Ψmax,[a,b] describes complete entanglement of everything in P ′ with something in
P.

4.3   No Observer in the Second Patch
If we try to repeat this analysis without assuming the presence of an observer in the static
patch, we run into immediate difficulty.
     We found in section 4.2 that, assuming there is an observer in the complementary
patch P ′ , we can incorporate the constraints at the level of Hilbert space states by simply
omitting the Hilbert space Hobs′   of this second observer. Whether there is an observer in
the patch P was not important in this argument. In other words, if one assumes that there
is an observer in P ′ but none in P , then the map T defined in eqn. (4.10) makes sense as
an isomorphism between the space of coinvariants in H ⊗ Hobs   ′  and H. So in this case, the
                                    ∗
physical Hilbert space on which AP ′ acts should be just H  b = H.
     Since the definition of the map T would make sense with the roles of P and P ′ ex-
changed, we also seem to learn that if there is an observer in P and none in P ′ , the algebra
A∗P should act on H  b = H. However, this is not the case. Recall from eqn. (4.13) that,
as an algebra of operators on H, b A∗ ′ is generated by a′ ∈ A′ and H + q. For the same
                                       P
reason, the action of A∗P on H should now be generated by a ∈ A and H. As we established
earlier, for any representation Hb of A∗ , the commutant algebra A∗ ′ should be a Type II
                                         P                            P
von Neumann algebra. But the reason that we introduced an observer in the patch P in
the first place is that on the Hilbert space H of quantum fields in de Sitter space, there
are no operators (except c-numbers) that commute with both A and H. So H cannot be
a representation of A∗P .
     We do not have a definitive resolution of this puzzle, but we will offer a conjecture.




                                               – 31 –
     To motivate the conjecture, we start with this question. How much less do we expect
the maximum entropy to be if there an observer in P but none in P ′ , relative to the case
of identical operators in each of the two patches?
     To motivate an answer, let us discuss the corrections to the entropy SdS of de Sitter
space. According to Gibbons and Hawking [3], in leading order SdS = A/4GN , where A
is the area of the cosmological horizon. They obtained this result by evaluating the path
integral for the Euclidean version of de Sitter space, which is simply a sphere. In the
approximation of keeping only factors that depend exponentially on GN , the result is e−I ,
where I = −A/4GN is the classical action. Gibbons and Hawking interpreted this as eSdS ,
giving SdS = A/4GN .
     A more precise evaluation of the Euclidean path integral would then be expected to give
a better approximation to SdS . For our purposes, what is relevant is an extremely simple
correction13 to the original calculation that shifts the entropy by a multiple of log GN . In
general, consider a gauge or gravitational theory with a classical action proportional to 1/λ,
where λ is a coupling parameter. In such a theory, consider a family of classical solutions
that depends on r parameters, and assume that the generic element of the family is invariant
under an s-dimensional group F of gauge symmetries. Then the contribution of this family
                                           1
to the path integral is proportional to λ− 2 (r−s) (times e−I , with I the action). In the case
of gravity, we can use this formula with λ = GN . As a solution of Einstein’s equations
with positive cosmological constant, de Sitter space does not depend on any moduli, so
this is a case with r = 0. On the other hand, the de Sitter group GdS = SO(D + 1) is a
group of symmetries of this solution, so s = dim GdS . So a slightly more precise formula
                                                             dim G /2
for the Euclidean path integral of de Sitter space is e−I GN dS . Equating this with eS ,
one finds a logarithmic correction to the de Sitter entropy
                                      1    dim GdS
                             SdS =       −         log(1/GN ) + · · · ,                             (4.22)
                                     4GN      2
where the omitted terms are of order 1 for GN → 0. This logarithmic correction can be
found in eqn. (1.4) of [21] and more explicitly (for some values of D) in eqn. (1.12) of that
paper.
    Now assume that a particular static patch P has been selected by some sort of boundary
condition or partial gauge-fixing (see section 4.4) that explicitly breaks GdS down to the
symmetry group of P . This group is GP = R × SO(D − 1), where R is the group of time
translations of P , and SO(D − 1) is the group of rotations. So the logarithmic correction
to the entropy is now − 21 (1 + dim SO(D − 1)) log(1/GN ).
    What will happen to the maximum possible entropy if we include an observer in the
patch P , and nothing in P ′ ? In this case, we expect no increase in the maximum possible
entropy, since in the maximally entropic state of de Sitter space, all modes in P ′ are fully
entangled. Adding something to P without adding anything to P ′ does not increase the
maximum possible entanglement entropy, which is limited by what there is in P ′ . So we
expect that if an observer is added in P only, the logarithmic correction to the entropy is
  13
     The closest analog of this correction for a black hole would appear in the normalization of the measure
for integration over the time-shift mode.




                                                  – 32 –
unchanged and remains − 12 (1 + dim SO(D − 1)) log(1/GN ). On the other hand, suppose
we add an observer in P ′ who is identical to the observer in P . Then the two observers can
be maximally entangled. A calculation similar to the Gibbons-Hawking calculation but
including the entangled pair of observers is discussed in section 4.4. Intuitively, without
getting into details, we should expect that with the observers present, time translations
should not be interpreted as a group of unbroken gauge transformations, because time
translations act on the degrees of freedom of the observers. However, unless we equip each
observer with an orthonormal frame (this option was discussed in section 2.6), rotations
are still a group of gauge symmetries. So we expect that the logarithmic correction in the
presence of the pair of entangled observers will be just − 21 dim SO(D − 1) log(1/GN ). In
other words, omitting an observer from the patch P ′ reduces the maximum entropy by
1
2 log(1/GN ), up to a remainder that is finite for GN → 0.
      With this in mind, let us go back to the question of what is the appropriate Hilbert
space H   b if there is an observer in the patch P and none in the patch P ′ . This Hilbert
space is expected to admit an action of the Type II1 algebra AP . It therefore can be
characterized by a continuous dimension d, and, if d < 1, the maximum entropy state of
AP that can be realized by a pure state in H  b has an entropy deficit log(1/d), as we learned
in section 4.1. Since the entropy deficit that we expect as a result of having no observer in
P ′ is 21 log(1/GN ), we are led to conjecture that
                                                1/2
                                          d ∼ GN .                                     (4.23)

     If this is the correct answer, then it is not surprising that we do not get a sensible
answer when we apply the analysis of section 4.2 to the case of an observer in only one
patch, because our analysis only suffices to determine the limit of d for GN → 0, and eqn.
(4.23) says that this limit is the forbidden value d = 0. If eqn. (4.23) is correct, some sort
of quantum correction is needed in order to get a sensible result. Possibly it is important
to take into account fluctuations in the horizon.

4.4   Euclidean Approach
Here we will generalize the Euclidean approach to the de Sitter entropy [3] to include a
completely entangled pair of observers. The Euclidean approach as traditionally developed
computes a function that is called the “entropy” without including an observer; however,
it is entirely unclear in what sense the function that is computed actually is an entropy.
By including an observer in the Euclidean description, we can describe a calculation that
is similar in spirit to the original one [3] and that gives a similar answer (with a different
coefficient for the logarithmic correction), but does have a clear interpretation in terms of
entropy.
     With our assumption that an observer is described by operators p, q and Hamiltonian
                                                                          R
H = q, the observer can be described in Lorentz signature by an action dτ (pq̇ − q), where
τ is proper time measured along the observer’s worldline. In Euclidean signature, this
           R
becomes dτ (−ipq̇ − q).
     The Euclidean version of de Sitter space is a sphere S D . We assume that the path
integral for de Sitter space containing an entangled pair of observers is dominated by a




                                           – 33 –
Figure 3. A sphere S D – drawn here for D = 2 – with a closed geodesic γ, the Euclidean worldline
of the observer.


saddle point in which spacetime is S D with a round metric, and the observer worldline is
a simple closed geodesic γ ⊂ S D (fig. 3). The circumference of γ is βdS , the inverse of the
de Sitter temperature.
     In this situation, if we “cut” S D on a plane of symmetry that is orthogonal to the
worldline γ, and continue to Lorentz signature, then we get a Lorentz signature picture
with a pair of observers, one in a static patch P and one in the complementary patch P ′ .
We expect these two observers to be maximally entangled in a thermofield double state,
since in the Euclidean picture they are connected by a finite length worldline.
     In Lorentz signature, a particular static patch P can be selected by imposing a bound-
ary condition on the observer’s worldline at past and future infinity. In Euclidean signature,
there is no asymptotic region in which a boundary condition can be imposed. Instead, we
select a particular closed geodesic γ ⊂ S D by partial gauge-fixing, reducing the symmetry
group GdS of de Sitter space to the symmetry group of a particular geodesic, which is the
same as the symmetry group GP of a particular static patch. Taking this into account, the
coefficient of the logarithmic correction discussed in section 4.3 is reduced from − 12 dim GdS
to − 12 dim GP .
     Apart from this, in the leading approximation for small GN , the path integral that
we have to do factors as the product of a gravitational path integral, studied originally by
Gibbons and Hawking [3] and in much more detail recently [21], and a path integral for
the observer.
     The path integral of the observer is
                          Z                    I                
                                                          dq
                            Dp(τ ) Dq(τ ) exp       dτ ip     −q      .                   (4.24)
                                                  γ       dτ

We do first the path integral over p. This gives a delta function δ(dq/dτ ). This delta
function has two consequences.
     First, in doing the path integral over q, we can treat q as a constant. The action for
the case that q is constant is βdS q, so the measure in the integration over the zero-mode of
q is e−βdS q . Bearing in mind that in analyzing the algebra in section (2.4) we set x = −q,
this factor is eβdS x . We have seen this factor before. The pure state with maximum entropy
                                                          √
for the algebra AP of the static patch P was Ψmax = βdS eβdS x/2 ΨdS . In a Type I context,




                                             – 34 –
such a state would lead to a density matrix proportional to eβdS x , although in the usual
formalism for Type II algebras, this exponential factor is in the definition of the trace (eqn.
(2.8)) rather than in the density matrix (which is ρ = 1 for the maximally entropic state).
     But the delta function has another and more troublesome consequence. For any peri-
                             H    dq
odic function q(τ ), we have γ dτ dτ = 0. Therefore the delta function δ(dq/dτ ) that came
from the integral over p contains a factor δ(0). Concretely, this factor comes from the
integral over the constant mode of p. Formally an infinite factor δ(0) in the path integral
increases the logarithm of the path integral, which is the de Sitter entropy, by an infinite
additive constant.
     We argued in section 4.3 that adding an entangled pair of observers in the patches
P and P ′ increases the maximum possible entropy not by an infinite amount but by an
amount of order 21 log GN . To get this answer, we would like to replace the factor δ(0) that
                                                      1/2
came from the path integral over p by a factor 1/GN . How can we do this?
     By taking the Hamiltonian of the observer to be simply H = q, we have given a
continuous spectrum to the observer and therefore it is natural that incorporating a pair
of entangled observers can increase the maximum entanglement entropy by an infinite
                                                                                          1/2
amount, accounting for the δ(0). Thus from this point of view, to replace δ(0) by 1/GN ,
we should replace the continuous spectrum of the observer by a discrete spectrum with a
                         1/2
level spacing of order GN .
     A simple way to do this is to replace the Hamitonian H = q of the observer by
                                                                      1/2
H = GN p2 + q, which does indeed lead to a level spacing of order GN . If we add this term
to the Hamiltonian, then the action likewise has an extra term GN γ dτ p2 (τ ). For small
                                                                        H

GN , this has no important effect in the preceding calculation except to replace the δ(0)
                                                                               1/2
that came from the integral over the constant mode of p with a factor 1/GN . Moreover,
it seems that a GN p2 term in the Hamiltonian of the observer would have played little role
elsewhere in this article, since all of our considerations have involved the limit GN → 0.
     Although it may be true that adding a term GN p2 to the Hamiltonian of the observer
makes a better model, there are two things that make us reluctant to propose this as a
solution to the problem with the δ(0). First, it is not clear to us on physical grounds why
                                                                        1/2
one should assume that the observer has a level spacing of order GN . Second, it is not
clear that adding this term to the Hamiltonian of an observer would help in addressing the
possibly related puzzle that we ran into in section 4.3, where it was difficult to understand
the continuous dimensions of the physical Hilbert space in the case that there is an observer
in only one of the two complementary patches. Something more subtle may be needed to
deal properly with both the δ(0) and the continuous dimension.

5   Revisiting the Black Hole

In this section, we will revisit the Type II∞ algebra of observables exterior to a black hole
horizon. One goal is to simplify the arguments that have been presented previously, and
formulate them in a way that is not limited to the case of negative cosmological constant.
A second goal is to explain that the black hole can be treated quite similarly to the way
that we have analyzed de Sitter space in the present article.




                                            – 35 –
Figure 4. The Penrose diagram of the maximally extended asymptotically flat Schwarzschild
spacetime. The left and right exteriors are the unshaded regions labeled ℓ and r; the left and right
regions at spatial infinity are labeled L and R. The shaded regions are behind past and future
horizons. S is a bulk Cauchy hypersurface, chosen so that it can be decomposed as a union of
portions in regions ℓ and r.


     For illustration, we will primarily focus on the maximally extended Schwarzschild
solution in an asymptotically flat spacetime. However, our arguments apply equally well
for AdS Schwarzschild, and we will briefly turn to this setting to discuss the boundary
interpretation of the Type II∞ algebra.
     We work in a semiclassical limit in which the Schwarzschild radius rS of the black hole
is held fixed, while Newton’s constant GN → 0. This means that the mass of the black
hole is very large.

5.1   The Type II∞ algebra
Let Y be the maximally extended Schwarzschild spacetime (fig. 4), and let ℓ and r denote
the left and right exteriors in Y (L and R will denote left and right spatial infinity).
Consider first ordinary quantum field theory in the curved spacetime Y . This theory has
a Hilbert space H0 , and Type III1 algebras Aℓ,0 and Ar,0 of observables in the left and
right exterior. The algebras Aℓ,0 and Ar,0 are factors (their centers consist only of complex
scalars), and they are each other’s commutants.
    The spacetime Y has a Killing vector field V that generates time translations. V is
future-directed in the right exterior and past-directed in the left exterior. In the quantum
theory constructed on Y by expanding around the black hole solution, there is a conserved
quantity bh associated to V . If S is a bulk Cauchy hypersurface, then
                                           Z
                                      h=
                                      b      dΣµ V ν Tµν ,                               (5.1)
                                              S

where Tµν is the energy-momentum tensor of the bulk fields (including the energy-momentum
pseudo-tensor of the bulk gravitational fluctuations). The operator b
                                                                    h has an interpretation
in modular theory (or Tomita-Takesaki theory) that is related to the thermal nature of
the black hole. Let ΨHH be the Hartle-Hawking state of the quantum fields on Y [38, 39].
Then the modular operator of the state ΨHH for the algebra Ar,0 is ∆ = exp(−Hmod )




                                              – 36 –
where Hmod , known as the modular Hamiltonian, satisfies Hmod = β b    h, with β the inverse
of the Hawking temperature [41, 42].
     As in fig 4, one can choose the hypersurface S to pass through the codimension 2
intersection of the left and right horizons. It can then be split as a union S = Sℓ ∪ Sr of
portions to the left and right of the horizon. Having done so, it is tempting to define left
and right bulk Hamiltonians14             Z
                                            hr =         dΣµ V ν Tµν
                                                    Sr
                                                   Z
                                          hℓ = −          dΣµ V ν Tµν ,                          (5.2)
                                                     Sℓ

and then
                                                h = hr − hℓ .
                                                b                                                (5.3)
However, this does not work, because the fluctuations in hr and hℓ are divergent. A modular
Hamiltonian of a Type III algebra never has a splitting as in eqn. (5.3). By contrast, for
algebras of Type I or Type II, there is always such a splitting. As we shall see, adding
gravity will lead to a splitting of b
                                    h and to a Type II∞ algebra.
     In the limit GN → 0, local fluctuations of the gravitational field can be treated as
just one more field propagating on Y . Specifically, for GN → 0, the graviton becomes a
massless spin 2 free field, which can be quantized in the usual way. However, adding gravity
also introduces additional modes that are not related to local excitations. This is perhaps
most obvious in the case of JT gravity in two dimensions. There are no local excitations
at all. Nevertheless, JT gravity has a two-dimensional phase space, which was analyzed
in detail in [51], for example. The phase space consists by definition of modifications of
the geometry along a Cauchy hypersurface S that satisfy natural boundary conditions at
infinity, modulo those that can be eliminated by a diffeomorphism of the full spacetime
that is trivial at infinity. One such mode is the black hole energy, which in JT gravity is
the same whether it is measured in the left or right asymptotic region. In other words, in
JT gravity, the left and right Hamiltonians are equal, HL = HR . The second mode in JT
gravity is more subtle; it involves a shift in the times tL and tR measured at infinity along
S on the left and on the right. In other words, a localized perturbation of the geometry
along S can have the property that it can be eliminated by a diffeomorphism, but only by
a diffeomorphism that acts nontrivially at infinity, shifting the times tL and tR measured
along S in the left and right asymptotic regions. Since the Schwarzschild spacetime has a
time translation symmetry that shifts tL and tR by equal and opposite amounts, only the
sum ∆ = tL + tR is well-defined; thus there is only one mode of this kind.
     The time-shift ∆ is not measureable by an observer on either the left or right side
of the black hole, so it is not part of the algebra of observables in either exterior region.
In JT gravity, the algebras of gauge-invariant observables accessible on the left or right
regions outside the horizon are generated, respectively, by HL and HR . In particular, these
algebras are abelian, and the two algebras coincide, since HL = HR . This is quite different
 14
      The reason to define hℓ with a minus sign is that V is past-directed in the left region.




                                                    – 37 –
from the situation in ordinary quantum field theory, where the left and right algebras Aℓ,0
and Ar,0 are factors and their intersection consists only of multiples of the identity.
     For Schwarzschild black holes above two dimensions, the time-shift mode is still present,
and there are additional modes of a somewhat similar nature that represent a relative ro-
tation between the two asymptotic boundaries. Taking these modes into account, the full
Hilbert space in a Schwarzschild spacetime, including perturbative gravitational fluctua-
tions around the Schwarzschild background, is

                            H∼
                             = H0 ⊗ L2 (Rt ) ⊗ L2 (SO(D − 1)),                            (5.4)

where L2 (Rt ) and L2 (SO(D − 1)) are respectively the spaces of square-integrable functions
of the time-shift ∆ and of the relative rotation. We give an alternative derivation of this
result – making clear the close analogy with the Hilbert space of two observers in de Sitter
space – in Section 5.2 below. Of the three factors in H, the first, namely H0 , by itself,
admits the action of natural Type III algebras in the left and right exterior regions, just
as in ordinary quantum field theory in a Schwarzschild background. Our main goal here
is to explain that properly including the second factor L2 (Rt ) turns the Type III algebras
into algebras of Type II∞ . The third factor L2 (SO(D − 1)) describes the possibility that
the Schwarzschild black hole can acquire spin and become a Kerr black hole. (To be more
precise, a slowly rotating black hole can be described by a wavefunction in L2 (SO(D − 1)),
but if the black hole rotation is not sufficiently slow, one must instead use the nonlinear
Einstein equations and the full Kerr solution.) This third factor does not affect the nature
of the algebra, and so we will henceforth ignore it for simplicity.
     To analyze the algebra of observables in the right exterior region, it is convenient to
use the time translation symmetry of the Schwarzschild solution to fix tR = 0 and therefore
∆ = tL . Having made this choice, the coordinate system at spatial infinity in the right
exterior is completely fixed. Therefore, it is possible to gravitationally dress bulk operators
to the right asymptotic region. To gravitationally dress bulk operators to the left exterior
region, we would instead choose tL = 0, ∆ = tR .
     Time translations of the left and right boundaries are generated by the ADM Hamil-
tonians HL and HR . We aim to construct an algebra of observables for the right exterior
region in the limit GN → 0. In that limit, HL and HR diverge, simply because the black
hole mass M0 = rS /2GN diverges. It is convenient, therefore, to define subtracted Hamil-
tonians
                             hL = HL − M0 ,       hR = HR − M0                            (5.5)
that have limits for GN → 0.
    The operator hL generates shifts of tL . We can make a unitary transformation to
reduce to the case that hL acts only on tL , hL = i ∂t∂L , since if instead hL = i ∂t∂L + XL
where XL acts on H0 , we can remove XL by conjugating with exp(itL XL ), and thereby
reduce to hL = i ∂t∂L .
    The conserved charge b
                         h associated to the time translation symmetry of the full space-
time is related to the right and left ADM Hamiltonians by

                                 h = HR − HL = hR − hL .
                                 b                                                        (5.6)




                                            – 38 –
The algebra Ar of operators in the right exterior is generated by the algebra Ar,0 of QFT
operators in the right exterior, together with the subtracted right ADM energy hR = hL +b      h.
Since hL commutes with everything in Ar,0 , while h generates the modular automorphism
                                                           b
group of Ar,0 , this is the crossed product of Ar,0 by the modular automorphism group of
ΨHH , and hence is a Type II∞ algebra.
     The algebra Aℓ of operators in the left exterior is generated by the subtracted left ADM
energy hL , together with eitL h Aℓ,0 e−itL h . The conjugation of the left exterior QFT algebra
                               b            b

Aℓ,0 by eitL h is necessary because we chose a gauge where operators that act solely on H0
             b

are implicitly dressed to the right boundary, and hence are not local to the left exterior.
Conjugating by eitL h shifts this gravitational dressing to the left boundary. Explicitly, one
                      b

can check that                   h                             i
                                  eitL h Aℓ,0 e−itL h , hL + b
                                                             h =0,                          (5.7)
                                       b            b



and hence eitL h Aℓ,0 e−itL h commutes with right-boundary time translations. Indeed, the
                 b            b

algebra Aℓ is the commutant of Ar , as desired.

5.2    Isometries and Gauge Constraints
We now give an alternative derivation of the Hilbert space and algebra described above
that makes the analogy with the de Sitter construction manifest. The isometry group of the
asymptotic boundary of the Schwarzschild spacetime Y includes two copies of Rt that act
separately as time translations of the left and right boundaries.15 Gauge transformations
of the asymptotic boundary are physical degrees of freedom. Hence, before imposing any
gauge constraints, we have an “extended Hilbert space”

                                  Hext ∼
                                       = H0 ⊗ L2 (Rt )L ⊗ L2 (Rt )R .

Here, H0 describes the state of the bulk quantum fields, L2 (Rt )L describes timeshifts of
the left asymptotic boundary, and L2 (Rt )R describes the timeshifts of the right asymptotic
boundary. Just as in section 5.1, up to conjugation, the left and right subtracted ADM
Hamiltonians act solely on L2 (Rt )L and L2 (Rt )R as hL = i∂tL and hR = i∂tR respectively.
The (extended) right exterior algebra consists of

                               Aext  ∼             2
                                                          
                                 r = Ar,0 ⊗ B L (Rt )R ,                               (5.8)

with the left exterior algebra defined analogously.
    Note that these are almost the same algebras and Hilbert space that we found for
de Sitter space with two observers in section 4.2, before imposing the gauge constraints.
The only difference is that the subtracted ADM energies hL and hR , unlike the observer
energies, do not need to be positive.16 Instead, hL and hR can take any real values in the
semiclassical limit, because of the large constant rS /2GN that has been subtracted when
  15
     For simplicity, we omit two copies of SO(D − 1) whose inclusion would lead to the relative orientation
mode in (5.4). We also omit certain asymptotic symmetries such as translations that do not interact with
the gauge constraints in an interesting way.
  16
     In fact, as we shall see, the analogous constraint to the positivity of the observer energies in de Sitter
would be a finite upper bound on the subtracted ADM energies hL and hR .




                                                   – 39 –
defining them. As in section 2.4, in the absence of a bound on hL and hR , the physical
algebras will be of Type II∞ rather than Type II1 .
     The final step in deriving those algebras is to impose the isometry group of the full
Schwarzschild spacetime as a set of gauge constraints. The relevant isometry group con-
sists of a single copy of Rt . Because this isometry acts nontrivially at the asymptotic
boundary, the correct constraint is not that the bulk isometry generator b h annihilates all
physical states, but rather that the generator is equal to the corresponding generator in
the asymptotic isometry group. In this case, the constraint is exactly (5.6), namely

                                             h = hR − hL
                                             b                                                      (5.9)

This is the same constraint that we found for observers in de Sitter, except that the energy
of the observers has been replaced by minus the subtracted ADM energies.
     The problem of how to incorporate such a constraint on the Hilbert space was already
discussed in section 4.2. It leads to the elimination of one of the two factors of L2 (Rt ).
     The physical algebra of operators in the right exterior consists of the invariant subalge-
bra of the extended algebra of operators Aext        r given in eqn. (5.8). This algebra is generated
by hR together with e     itR h
                              b
                                Ar,0 e −itR h
                                            b
                                              . Operators eitR h Ar,0 e−itR h are bulk operators that have
                                                               b            b

been dressed to the right boundary. Similarly the algebra Aext            r is generated by hL together
with e −itL h
            b       itL h
              Al,0 e . In the extended Hilbert space description, no operators that act solely
                        b

on H0 are gauge-invariant; any gauge-invariant operator must be dressed to either the right
or the left boundary (or to some combination of the two).

5.3    Boundary Interpretation
If the Schwarzschild spacetime Y is replaced by AdS-Schwarzschild, then the discussion
above is completely unchanged. However in this case we know that the bulk gravity theory
has a holographic dual. This holographic dual has an associated parameter N , such that
the GN → 0 limit corresponds to N → ∞. At finite GN , the left and right boundary
algebras are Type I. We will see that the Type II∞ algebras describe a particular large N
limit of these Type I algebras.
     Let us first understand the boundary interpretation of the Hilbert space H described
in (5.4). For the purposes of illustration, it is helpful to consider the state
                                        Z
                                  |Ψ⟩ = dtf (t) |ΨHH (t)⟩ ,
                                   e

where |ΨHH (t)⟩ = exp(ihL t) |ΨHH ⟩ is a timeshifted version of the Hartle-Hawking state.
                  e is the product of |ΨHH ⟩ ∈ H0 with some function f (t) ∈ L2 (Rt ) that
In other words, |Ψ⟩
describes a state of the the time-shift mode. The holographic dictionary tells us that the
boundary dual of hL is HL − M0 , where HL is the left boundary Hamiltonian, and the dual
of |ΨHH ⟩ is the thermofield double state
                                         X
                               |ΨTFD ⟩ =   e−βEi /2 |i⟩L |i⟩R ,                     (5.10)
                                                i




                                                    – 40 –
where the sum is over all energy eigenstates |i⟩. Hence
         XZ                                           X
  |Ψ⟩ =
   e           dtf (t)ei(Ei −M0 )t−βEi /2 |i⟩L |i⟩R =   fe(Ei − M0 )e−βEi /2 |i⟩L |i⟩R .   (5.11)
           i                                          i

In other words, |Ψ⟩
                  e is dual to a variant of the thermofield state, with finite energy fluctu-
ations that are controlled by the Fourier transform fe(Ei − M0 ) of f (t).
     Note that to construct the thermofield double state itself we would need to have f (t) =
δ(t). Since δ(t) ̸∈ L2 (Rt ), the large N limit of |ΨTFD ⟩ does not lie in H. Indeed, in
the strict N → ∞ limit, the left and right boundary algebras of any Hilbert space that
contains the thermofield double cannot be Type I or II, because the fluctuations in the
modular Hamiltonian of the state |ΨTFD ⟩ diverge at large N . If one instead works in a
perturbative expansion in 1/N , then the thermofield double state can be described by a
Gaussian wavefunction for the timeshift mode where the energy fluctuations are of order
N and hence ∆t = O(1/N ) [26].
     What about states in H where the QFT degrees of freedom are not in the Hartle-
Hawking state? The holographic dictionary tells us that QFT operators in the large N
limit are dual to single-trace boundary operators. In fact, the full Hilbert space H is
spanned by states that can be constructed using finite products of single-trace operators
from states of the form (5.11). This is discussed in detail in [32]. The algebras associated
to the left and right exteriors are generated by the subtracted Hamiltonians HL/R − M0
and single-trace boundary operators.
     From a boundary perspective, it is not so surprising that these algebras are Type II,
and hence have a finite renormalized trace. At finite N , operators whose matrix elements
decay sufficiently rapidly at large energy will have a finite Hilbert space trace. For simple
operators that are tightly peaked in energy in a finite window around M0 , this trace should
diverge at large N as exp(SBH ) times some N -independent constant. The Type II algebra
trace simply divides out the divergent constant exp(SBH ), and keeps the finite piece.


Acknowledgments VC is supported by a grant from the Simons Foundation (816048, VC).
GP is supported by the UC Berkeley physics department, the Simons Foundation through
the “It from Qubit” program, the Department of Energy via the GeoFlow consortium
(QuantISED Award DE-SC0019380) and AFOSR (FA9550-22-1-0098); he also acknowl-
edges support from an IBM Einstein Fellowship at the Institute for Advanced Study. RL
acknowledges partial support by MIUR FARE R16X5RB55W QUEST-NET, GNAMPA-
INdAM and the MIUR Excellence Department Project awarded to the Department of
Mathematics, University of Rome Tor Vergata, CUP E83C18000100006. Research of EW
is partly supported by NSF Grant PHY1911298. We thank D. Marolf for remarks on
quantization in de Sitter space.




                                             – 41 –
A    Crossed Product and Takesaki Duality

For the convenience of the reader, we recall here a few basic facts on the structure of Connes
and Takesaki’s crossed product of a von Neumann algebra by a group action. The crossed
product construction is analogous to the semi-direct product in group theory. We refer to
[52, 53] for a complete exposition.
Crossed product. Let M be a von Neumann algebra on a Hilbert space H, G a locally
compact group, and α an action of G on M ; by changing the representation, we may
assume that α is implemented by a unitary action U of G on H, namely α = Ad U . The
                c = M ⋊α G of M by α is the von Neumann algebra on H ⊗ L2 (G)
crossed product M

                               c = {x ⊗ 1, u(g) : x ∈ M, g ∈ G}′′
                               M                                                        (A.1)

(double commutant), where u(g) = U (g) ⊗ λ(g), with λ the left translation unitary rep-
resentation of G on L2 (G). Namely, M  c is the von Neumann algebra generated by M ⊗ 1
and u(g), g ∈ G. Note that Ad u = α on M . The construction of M   c does not depend on
the choice of the unitary implementation U of α, up to a natural isomorphism.
     Let β : G → Aut M be another action. We shall say that α and β are cocycle equivalent
if there exists a unitary α-cocycle g ∈ G 7→ w(g) ∈ M , namely w(gh) = w(g)αg (w(h)),
w(·) continuous map with w(g) unitary, such that βg (x) = w(g)αg (x)w(g)∗ . If α and β are
cocycle equivalent, there exists a natural isomorphism

                                 {M ⋊α G, α
                                          b} ≃ {M ⋊β G, β}
                                                        b ;                             (A.2)

this isomorphism is the identity on M and maps u(g) to w(g)u(g).
Dual system. In the following, we assume that G is abelian, denote by G   b the dual group
and by ⟨p, g⟩, p ∈ G, b g ∈ G, the duality pairing between Gb and G. In the particular, if
G = R, we have G                       its
                   b = R and ⟨s, t⟩ = e .
      Let V be the unitary representation of Gb on L2 (G), with V (p) the multiplication by
⟨p, ·⟩ on L2 -functions. Then v = 1 ⊗ V implements the action αb of Gb on M
                                                                          c given by

                α
                bp (x) = x,     bp (u(g)) = ⟨p, g⟩u(g),
                                α                         g ∈ G, p ∈ G,
                                                                     b x ∈ M,           (A.3)

(with the identification x = x ⊗ 1) called the dual action. The α
                                                                b-fixed point subalgebra
  α
M is M :
  b

                            M = {x ∈ M c:α  bp (x) = x, p ∈ G}.
                                                            b                      (A.4)

Let M
    c=M c ⋊αb G
              b be the crossed product of M
                                          c by α
                                               b. Then M
                                                       c is the α
                                                                b-fixed point algebra
    c                                                           b
  α
  b
  b
M
c of Mc:
c     c
                              c = {x ∈ M
                              M         c:α
                                        c
                                            b(x) = x}.
                                            b                                   (A.5)
Takesaki duality. Takesaki duality shows the isomorphism of the dynamical systems

                              {M  b} ≃ {M ⊗ B(L2 (G)), α ⊗ Ad λ}
                               c, α                                                     (A.6)
                               c  b




                                              – 42 –
(Ad λ is the action on B(L2 (G)) implemented by λ), namely M ⊗ B(L2 (G)) is isomorphic
   c with an isomorphism that interchanges α ⊗ Adλ with with α
to M
   c
                                                              b. Therefore
                                                              b
                                         α⊗Ad λ
                            M ⊗ B(L2 (G))        ≃ M ⋊α G .                           (A.7)


Dominant and integrable actions. Recall that M is properly infinite if M contains a type
I∞ factor (for example, if M is of type III); equivalently, if M is isomorphic to M ⊗ F with
F a type I∞ factor.
    By definition, the action α on M is dominant if M α is properly infinite and

                          {M, α} ≃ {M ⊗ B(L2 (G)), α ⊗ Ad λ}                          (A.8)

(isomorphism of dynamical systems). Then

                        α dominant =⇒ M α is isomorphic to M
                                                           c.                         (A.9)

α is dominant iff there exist unitaries z(p) ∈ M , p ∈ G
                                                       b (Borel family) such that

                          αg (z(p)) = ⟨p, g⟩z(p),    g ∈ G, p ∈ G.
                                                                b                    (A.10)

The dual action is always dominant. Every action α is cocycle equivalent to a dominant
action β.
     The action α is said to be integrable if the linear span of
                                            Z
                                        +
                                
                                  x∈M ,        α(x) dg < ∞                      (A.11)
                                           G

is weakly dense in M . Every dominant action is integrable. If G is compact, every action
is integrable. Moreover:

   α integrable =⇒ M α is isomorphic to a reduced von Neumann subalgebra of M
                                                                            c,
                                                                            (A.12)
         α
namely M ≃ eM e for some projection e of M .
               c                          c
Weights, operator-valued weights, dual weights. A normal, faithful, semifinite (n.f.s.)
weight φ on M is a map M+ → [0, +∞] (the extended positive real numbers), with M+
the cone of positive elements of M , such that

             φ(x + y) = φ(x) + φ(y),     φ(ax) = aφ(x),      x, y ∈ M+ , a ≥ 0 ,     (A.13)

with sup φ(xi ) = φ(sup xi ) for every bounded, increasing nets {xi } in M+ (normality),
φ(x) = 0 =⇒ x = 0, x ∈ M+ (faithfulness), and the linear span M0 of the x ∈ M+ such
that φ(x) < ∞ is dense in M (semifiniteness). φ can be extended by linearity to all M0 .
     If N ⊂ M is a von Neumann subalgebra, a n.s.f. operator valued weight E : M+ → N     e+
is defined similarly as in (A.13), with N the extended positive part of N+ (see [52] for the
                                        e
definition of N
              e+ ), with the property

                         E(n∗ xn) = n∗ E(x)n ,      x ∈ M+ , n ∈ N .                 (A.14)




                                          – 43 –
The notion of operator-valued weight, due to Haagerup, generalises the notion of condi-
tional expectation.
    Let Mc = M ⋊α G be as above. Then
                                    Z
                            T (x) =   bp (x) dp , x ∈ M
                                      α               c+ ,                       (A.15)
                                         G
                                         b

                                            c+ → M
defines a n.f.s. operator-valued weight T : M      f+ .
     Every n.f.s. weight φ of M , in particular every normal, faithful state φ on M , has a
canonical lift to a n.f.s. weight φ
                                  b on M
                                       c given by

                                             b=φ·T ;
                                             φ                                          (A.16)

φ
b is called the dual weight of φ.
     Note that, if G is not discrete, φ(u(t))
                                      b       is not defined; however, formally, φ(u(t))
                                                                                 b       = 0,
t ̸= 0. For example, if G = Z, then an element X of M has a Fourier series expansion (in
                                                        c
some topology) with Fourier coefficients xn ∈ M , so
                                    X
                              X=        xn u(n) and φ(X)
                                                     b     = x0 .                     (A.17)
                                     n
                                        R
If G = R, this is formally true: if X = x(t)u(t) dt, with x(t) a “good” M -valued function,
then φ(X)
       b     = φ(x(0)).
      Note also that, if M = C, then M   c is L∞ (R) and φ b is the mean in Fourier trans-
form, namely φ(λ(f
                b     )) = f (0), say for a smooth, compactly supported f , where λ(f ) =
R
   f (s)λ(s)ds.
Crossed product by the modular group. We now specialise the above discussion to the case
G = R and the action α is given by the modular group σ φ of a faithful normal state φ on
M (the discussion may be generalized to the case of n.f.s. weights). Thus

                                         M
                                         c = M ⋊σφ R .                                  (A.18)

By the Connes cocycle Radon-Nikodym theorem, the modular groups associated with dif-
ferent states are cocycle equivalent, therefore M
                                                c does not depend on the choice of the state
φ, up to a natural isomorphism.
     We may define the action γ of R on M   c by setting

                    γs (x) = σsφ (x), x ∈ M,     γs (u(t)) = u(t),   s, t ∈ R,          (A.19)

indeed γs = Ad u(s) on M  c. It turns out that γ is the modular group σ φb of the dual weight
φ
b of φ on Mc. So sφb is inner. Thus, there exists a trace τ on M   c (a n.f.s. weight τ such
         ∗
that τ (z xz) = τ (x) for all unitaries z ∈ M
                                            c and x ∈ M c+ ) given by

                                                 b −1 ·) ,
                                         τ (·) = φ(ρ                                    (A.20)

where u(t) = ρit ; ρ is affiliated to M
                                      c, the density matrix of φ
                                                               b with respect to τ . Therefore,
M is semifinite.
c




                                              – 44 –
             bφ the dual action of σ φ on M
    With ϑ = σ                             c, we have ϑs (u(t)) = eits u(t), so ϑs (ρ) = es ρ,
therefore
                                     τ · ϑs = e−s τ ,                                  (A.21)
namely ϑ is a trace scaling action on Mc.
     If M is a type III von Neumann algebra, then M c is a type II∞ von Neumann algebra.
If M is a type III1 factor, then M is a II∞ factor.
                                 c
     Let x ∈ M and f a Borel function on R such that e−s |f (s)|ds < ∞. Since ρit =
                                                          R

U (t) ⊗ λ(t), we have

                                      b −1 f (log ρ)) = φ(T (xρ−1 f (log ρ)))
                     τ (xf (log ρ)) = φ(xρ                                                        (A.22)
                                                                Z
                                    = φ(x)T (ρ f (log ρ)) = φ(x) e−s f (s)ds.
                                              −1


In particular, if f is the characteristic function of [0, ∞), the projection e = f (log ρ) has
                     R∞
finite trace: τ (e) = 0 e−s ds = 1 < ∞.

B      The Hilbert Space of Coinvariants

In this appendix, we will review the construction [34, 35] of a physical Hilbert space for
quantum fields coupled to gravity in de Sitter space, in the limit G → 0. Then we will
explain how the construction can be naturally placed in the language of BRST cohomology.

B.1     Constraints and Group Averaging
First, we recall the construction of a Hilbert space for a quantum field in de Sitter space
X, in the absence of gravity [16–20]. For illustration, we consider the case of a free scalar
field ϕ of mass m, with action
                                 Z
                               1       p
                                   dD x det g g ij ∂i ϕ∂j ϕ + m2 ϕ2 .
                                                                   
                        I=−                                                             (B.1)
                               2
ϕ obeys the massive Klein-Gordon equation

                                        −g ij Di Dj + m2 ϕ = 0.
                                                        
                                                                                                    (B.2)

By ΨdS , we mean a state with Gaussian correlations in which the one-point function ⟨ϕ(x)⟩
vanishes, and the two-point function ⟨ϕ(x)ϕ(y)⟩ is determined by analytic continuation
from Euclidean signature. A Hilbert space H that provides an irreducible representation
of the canonical commutation relations of the field ϕ and contains such a state ΨdS can be
constructed in an essentially unique way. For this, we observe first that H must contain
states obtained by acting on ΨdS with any number of ϕ fields. So H must contain states
                   Z
             Ψf = dx1 dx2 · · · dxn f (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn )ϕ(x1 )ϕ(x2 ) · · · ϕ(xn )|ΨdS ⟩ (B.3)

where f (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn ) is any compactly supported function of an n-plet of points17 x1 , x2 , · · · ,
xn ∈ X. Let H0,n be the space generated by all such states Ψf , where f depends on n
  17
    Since Wightman functions are distributions in Lorentz signature, there is no need to require that the
points x1 , · · · , xn be distinct.




                                                 – 45 –
points, and let H0 = ⊕∞   n=0 H0,n . The vector ΨdS that we started with is an element of
H0,0 ⊂ H0 . Having specified the correlation functions of the field ϕ in the state ΨdS , we
immediately know what should be the inner products of states in H0 . For Ψf1 ∈ H0,n ,
Ψf2 ∈ H0,m , we define
              Z
⟨Ψf1 , Ψf2 ⟩ = dx1 · · · dx′m f 1 (x1 , · · · , xn )f2 (x′1 , · · · , x′m )⟨ΨdS |ϕ(xn ) · · · ϕ(x1 )ϕ(x′1 ) · · · ϕ(x′m )|ΨdS ⟩.
                                                                                               (B.4)
These integrals always converge, because f1 and f2 were defined to have compact support.
With this inner product, in H0 there are many null vectors; for example, if f = (−g ij Di Dj +
m2 )fe for some function fe of compact support, then Ψf is a null vector, because of the Klein-
Gordon equation satisfied by ϕ. Taking the quotient of H0 by its null vectors, we get a
space H1 that has all the properties of a Hilbert space except completeness. Its Hilbert
space completion is the Hilbert space H of the massive scalar field in de Sitter space.
     Now let us try to couple to gravity, in the limit GN → 0. After turning on gravity,
we cannot just consider the fluctuations of matter fields; we have to also construct a
Hilbert space of small fluctuations in the metric. This does not change the picture in a
qualitative way. What does qualitatively change the picture is that in the presence of
gravity, one wishes to impose the symmetry group GdS as a group of constraints. This is
subtle. Naively, for GdS to be a group of constraints means that states should be GdS -
invariant. So one’s first thought is to impose the constraints by restricting from H to its
GdS -invariant subspace HGdS . However, there are actually no GdS -invariant vectors in H
except multiples of ΨdS . The definition of H started with a space H0 constructed using
a function f of compact support on the product of n copies of X. The compact support
condition trivially means that such states cannot be GdS -invariant for n > 0. To define H,
we then took a completion, so that states in H are not necessarily derived from functions
of compact support. Nevertheless, states in H are never GdS -invariant. One can define
a vector space of GdS -invariant states Ψf , where f (x1 , x2 , · · · , xn ) is GdS -invariant, but
there is no way to define an inner product on the space of such states, since the necessary
integral never converges.
     Therefore a different procedure is needed. The procedure that works is to consider
not invariants in the action of GdS on the vectors Ψf , but coinvariants. For any Ψf ∈ H0
and any g ∈ GdS , we simply declare Ψf and gΨf to be equivalent. The equivalence classes
are called coinvariants. We also impose a constraint that ⟨ΨdS |Ψf ⟩ = 0 (the purpose of
this constraint is to avoid a divergent disconnected contribution in eqn. (B.5) below). The
space of Ψf subject to the equivalence relation and the constraint defines a new space H0′ ,
on which GdS acts trivially by fiat. The formula of eqn. (B.4) does not define an inner
product on H0′ , because in general for Ψf1 , Ψf2 ∈ H0 and g ∈ GdS , ⟨Ψf1 , Ψf2 ⟩ =  ̸ ⟨Ψf1 , gΨf2 ⟩.
However, averaging or more precisely integrating over GdS gives a simple fix. We define
                                               Z
                                (Ψf1 , Ψf2 ) =    dg ⟨Ψf1 , gΨf2 ⟩,                            (B.5)
                                                        GdS

where dg is the invariant Haar measure on the GdS group manifold. It is fairly obvious that
if the integral converges, the inner product ( , ) is consistent with the equivalence relation




                                                       – 46 –
(any state of the form (1 − g)Ψ is a null vector for this inner product), and therefore the
integral defines an inner product on H0′ . The convergence of the integral is subtle; see for
example [35] for analysis. Also subtle and not fully understood is the question of whether
the inner product defined this way is positive semi-definite. This is known to be the case
in some important examples [34]. We will not address these issues here; our goal is only to
explain how group averaging can be interpreted in terms of BRST quantization. Assuming
the inner product ( , ) exists and is positive semi-definite on the space H0′ , we can proceed
as before. We define a space H1′ as the quotient of H0′ by null vectors. The Hilbert space
completion of H1′ is then the desired Hilbert space H b taking into account the gravitational
constraints.

B.2    The BRST Interpretation
So far, we have just summarized the construction of [34, 35], which has been called “group
averaging” because of the role of integration over GdS in defining the inner product. In
general, group averaging can be naturally understood in a framework18 of BRST and
BV quantization [36]. Our goal in the rest of this appendix is to explain this point.
BRST quantization (rather than the more general BV quantization) is adequate when the
constraints generate a Lie algebra, so this approach will suffice.
     Let tp , p = 1, · · · , dim GdS be the linear operators that generate the action of GdS on
H0 . They obey
                                                         r
                                           [tp , tq ] = fpq tr ,                          (B.6)
        r are the structure constants of G . Those structure constants obey the Jacobi
where fpq                                 dS
          s f t = 0, or in more detail
identity f[pq r]s
                                  s t       s t       s t
                                 fpq frs + fqr fps + frp fqs = 0.                          (B.7)

Introduce fermion operators cr and bs , known respectively as ghosts and antighosts, with
anticommutation relations

                            {cr , bs } = δsr , {cr , cs } = {br , bs } = 0.                (B.8)

Ghost number is defined so that cr has ghost number 1 and bs has ghost number −1. The
antighost operators have an irreducible representation on a finite-dimensional vector space
K that contains a state | ↓⟩ of minimum ghost number, with bs | ↓⟩ = 0. Other states
in K are obtained by acting on | ↓⟩ with a polynomial in the c’s. In particular K also
contains the state | ↑⟩ = c1 c2 · · · cdimGdS | ↓⟩ of maximum ghost number, annihilated by the
c’s. Mathematically, an additive constant in the ghost number is usually fixed so that | ↓⟩
has ghost number zero and therefore | ↑⟩ has ghost number dim GdS . We will use that
convention, though physically it is not always the most natural choice.
     The group GdS acts on the combined space H0 ⊗ K with generators
                                                    X
                                                         t s
                                         Tr = tr −     frs c bt .                        (B.9)
                                                   s,t
 18
   See [54] for a relatively short and highly readable introduction to the BRST and BV methods of
quantization.




                                               – 47 –
The BRST operator is defined as
                                        X              1X t r s
                                  Q=         cr tr −          f c c bt .                        (B.10)
                                         r
                                                       2 r,s,t rs

The factor of 1/2 is important in verifying the crucial relation

                                                Q2 = 0,                                         (B.11)

which enables one to define the cohomology of Q. The cohomology of Q at ghost number
n is defined as the space of states Ψ of ghost number n that satisfy QΨ = 0, modulo those
of the form Ψ = Qχ. We denote this cohomology group as H n (Q, H0 ); mathematically, it
is called the degree n Lie algebra cohomology of GdS with values in H0 . The factor of 1/2
is also important in verifying the anticommutation relation

                                             {Q, br } = Tr .                                    (B.12)

This anticommutation relation ensures that the group generators act trivially on the coho-
mology of Q, since if QΨ = 0, then Tr Ψ = {Q, br }Ψ = Q(br Ψ).
     In the BRST approach to quantization, the space of physical states is defined via the
cohomology of the BRST operator Q at a specific value of the ghost number. Which is
the correct value is somewhat theory-dependent. However, normally there is one specific
“allowed” value of the ghost number and physical states are defined in terms of the BRST
cohomology19 at that value of the ghost number. If one did not have this restriction to
a particular value of the ghost number, there would be an invariant distinction between
physical states based on their ghost number.
     In the example of the de Sitter space with weakly coupled gravity, there are two
important values of the ghost number, namely the minimum and maximum possible values.
A state in H0 ⊗K of the minimum possible ghost number is of the general form Ψ   b = Ψ⊗| ↓⟩,
with Ψ ∈ H0 . The condition QΨ     b = 0 reduces to ta Ψ = 0, in other words Ψ must be GdS -
invariant. This is the naive approach to imposing the constraints. As explained earlier,
it is unsatisfactory, because except for ΨdS itself, there are no GdS -invariant states in H0
or in its Hilbert space completion. On the other hand, consider states with the maximum
possible ghost number. Such a state has the form Ψ       b = Ψ ⊗ | ↑⟩. For such a state, the
condition QΨ  b = 0 is trivial, since the ghost number of QΨb exceeds the maximum possible
value. However, we need to consider the equivalence relation Ψ    b ∼
                                                                    =Ψ b + Qχ. Concretely, a
general state of the appropriate ghost number is χ = a χ ba | ↑⟩ for some states χa ∈ H0 .
                                                         P a

For this choice, the equivalence relation becomes20

                                        Ψ∼
                                                 X
                                          =Ψ+       ta χa .                            (B.13)
                                                        a

Thus, for states of maximum ghost number, the equivalence relation reduces to an equiva-
lence relation on H0 , namely ta χ ∼
                                   = 0 for any state χ ∈ H0 and for a = 1, · · · , dim GdS . This
  19
    A completion is involved, as discussed momentarily.
  20
    This formula and some previous ones need slight modification if G is not unimodular. See footnote 22
and [55]. The symmetry groups of de Sitter space and of the static patch are unimodular.




                                                – 48 –
has the same content as the equivalence relation (1 − g)χ ∼        = 0 that we used in discussing
                                              ∼
group averaging, since from (1 − g)χ = 0, by differentiating with respect to g at g = 1 we
can deduce that ta χ ∼      = 0; conversely, from ta χ ∼
                                                       = 0 for all χ, we can deduce (1 − g)χ ∼ =0
by integration. So in short the top degree cohomology of the BRST operator Q acting on
H0 ⊗ K is the starting point in the construction of the Hilbert space via group averaging.
       The rest of the discussion proceeds rather as before, defining an inner product, discard-
ing null vectors, and taking a completion to get a Hilbert space. In the BRST language,
the construction of the inner product is naturally described as follows.
       First define an indefinite hermitian inner product on K such that ⟨↓ | ↑⟩ = 1; cr , bs are
hermitian; and ⟨Ψ, Ψ′ ⟩ = 0 if Ψ, Ψ′ have ghost number n, n′ with n + n′ ̸= dim GdS . These
conditions completely determine the inner product; for instance ⟨cr ↓ |bs ↑⟩ = ⟨↓ |cr bs | ↓⟩ =
δsr , since {cr , bs } = δsr and cr | ↑⟩ = 0. On H0′ ⊗ K, define an inner product ⟨ , ⟩ that is the
tensor product of the inner product just defined on K and the natural one on H0′ that was
defined in eqn. (B.4). Then Q is hermitian in this inner product, so ⟨Ψ, Ψ′ ⟩, for Ψ, Ψ′ of
respective ghost numbers n and dim GdS − n, induces a natural sesquilinear map

                           ⟨ , ⟩ : H n (Q, H0′ ) × H dim GdS −n (Q, H0′ ) → C.                     (B.14)

However, this map is not very useful for our purposes, since physical states lie in H dim GdS (Q, H0′ ),
which is paired with H 0 (Q, H0′ ) = 0.
     There is a simple way around this. We defined H0 in terms of states Ψf where f
has compact support. We can drop the compact support condition and define a “dual”
space H  e0 generated by states Ψf with any smooth function f , not necessarily of compact
support. The inner product ⟨ , ⟩ defined in eqn. (B.4) by integration over a product of
copies of X makes sense as a pairing between H        e0 and H0 . (It does not make sense as a
pairing between H  e0 and itself, which is why it is necessary to base the construction on the
cohomology with values in H0 .) We can define the BRST cohomology H n (Q, H        e0 ) for states
             e                        0
valued in H0 , and in particular H (Q, H0 ) is the naive space of unnormalizable states Ψf
                                            e
with GdS -invariant f . As we explained at the beginning, the only trouble with that space
is that it is not a Hilbert space in a natural way.
     However, the pairing between H    e0 and H0 that comes from eqn. (B.4) is useful. Taking
the tensor product of this with the inner product on K, we get a natural sesquilinear pairing
⟨ , ⟩ : (He0 ⊗ K) × (H0 ⊗ K) → C and, since Q is again hermitian, this leads to a much more
interesting map
                                         e0 ) × H dim GdS −n (Q, H0′ ) → C.
                         ⟨ , ⟩ : H n (Q, H                                                 (B.15)
Therefore, to define a hermitian inner product on H dim GdS (Q, H0′ ), we need a linear map
η : H dim GdS (Q, H0′ ) → H 0 (Q, H
                                  e ′ ) (sometimes called a rigging map in the literature).
                                    0
Such a map is the composition of b1 b2 · · · bn with integration over the action of GdS . The
integration operation can be formally denoted δ(T⃗ ), since it projects onto (unnormalizable)
states that are annihilated by the T ’s. Thus η = b1 b2 · · · bdim GdS δ(T⃗ ). We have21 [Q, η} = 0,
  21
     The expression [Q, η}, for any operator η, is defined as Qη − (−1)η ηQ, where (−1)η is 1 or −1 if η is
bosonic or fermionic. In the present case, η is bosonic or fermionic depending on whether dim GdS is even
or odd.




                                                 – 49 –
since22 {Q, br } = Tr , [Q, Tr ] = 0, and Tr δ(T⃗ ) = 0. So η does give a natural map from
H dim GdS (Q, H0′ ) to H 0 (Q, H
                               e ′ ). In short, then, from a BRST point of view, the natural
                                 0
hermitian inner product on H dim GdS (Q, H0′ ) is

                                                      (Ψ, Ψ′ ) = ⟨Ψ|η|Ψ′ ⟩.                                                     (B.16)

Once this inner product is defined, as usual one reduces by null vectors and takes a com-
pletion to get the desired Hilbert space H.   b
     One further subtlety is the role of the original de Sitter state ΨdS . When we summa-
rized the group averaging procedure in Appendix B.1, in addition to imposing an equiva-
lence relation that had the same content as ta χ ∼   = 0, we also split off ΨdS by restricting to
states Ψf that are orthogonal to ΨdS . This was necessary for convergence of the integral
(B.5). Similarly, in the BRST approach, η only makes sense as an operator on H0′ , not
on H0 . However, physically it makes sense that ΨdS should be included as a vector in the
Hilbert space H b after imposing constraints. We believe that a heuristic explanation is as
follows. First of all, the state ΨdS | ↑⟩ is contained in the BRST cohomology with values in
H0 ⊗ K, so the question is how to define its norm. Before imposing the GdS constraints, the
state ΨdS is normalizable and one can normalize it to have norm 1. When one imposes the
GdS constraints, one should divide the norm of the GdS -invariant state ΨdS by vol(GdS ),
the (infinite) volume of the de Sitter group. However, when one integrates over the group
to define the inner product, in the case of a GdS -invariant state, this just gives back a
factor of vol(GdS ). In other words, precisely because the Hilbert space inner product is
defined by integration over the group, the state ΨdS has a nonzero norm after imposing the
constraints and survives as a vector in the physical Hilbert space. Obviously, it would be
desirable to have an explanation of this point that does not involve canceling the infinite
factors of vol(GdS ).

B.3       The Observables
In BRST quantization, though the ghosts are important in understanding the physical
states, the analysis of the observables is more straightforward. This has been implicitly
assumed in the present article, as our main focus has been the algebra of observables in the
static patch, and we analyzed this algebra with no mention of the ghosts. The fact that
the description of the observables is straightforward can be explained as follows. First of
  22
                                                                      
      The formula {Q, br } = Tr implies that Q, b1 b2 · · · bn } is a linear combination of operators
b1 · · · bi−1 Ti bi+1 · · · bn . In such an expression, we move Ti to the right, where it annihilates δ(T⃗ ). In
                                                                                                                          k
moving Ti to the right, we pick up terms that are of order n − 1 in b, since [Ti , bj ] = fij                               bk . Summing
                                                            i1 i2 ···in k                              i1 i2 ···in
all such contributions, we get a multiple of ϵ                          fi1 i2 bk bi3 · · · bin where ϵ            is completely antisym-
metric. This expression vanishes for GdS and also for the symmetry group of the static patch. In fact,
ϵi1 i2 ···in fik1 i2 bk bi3 · · · bin is a multiple of frt
                                                        t
                                                           {cr , b1 . . . bn }, and vanishes if and only if frt        t
                                                                                                                         = 0, which is the
condition for G to be unimodular (meaning that a left-invariant measure on the group manifold is also
right-invariant). If G is not unimodular, the group averaging procedure must be slightly modified by cor-
recting the group generators [55]. Any semisimple Lie group and any group that has no invariant subgroup
of codimension 1 is unimodular. (The symmetry group of the static patch is unimodular though it has such
a subgroup.) A simple example of a Lie group that is not unimodular is the group of 2 × 2 upper triangular
matrices.




                                                                – 50 –
all, in the BRST approach, an observable is defined to be an operator O on the full state
space including the ghosts that commutes with Q in the Z2 -graded sense: [Q, O} = 0.
This condition ensures that if QΨ = 0, then QOΨ = 0, and also that if Ψ = Qχ, then
OΨ = OQχ = (−1)O Q(Oχ). The two statements together imply that O has a well-defined
action on the cohomology of Q. Moreover, if O = [Q, U} for some operator U, then O acts
trivially on cohomology, since if QΨ = 0 then OΨ = [Q, U}Ψ = Q(UΨ). So observables in
BRST quantization are defined to be cohomology classes of operators; in other words, an
observable is an operator O that satisfies [Q, O} = 0, modulo operators of the form [Q, U}.
      In general, one shows that at least in the context of perturbation theory (which here
means perturbation theory in GN ) every cohomology class has a representative that can
be constructed with no explicit use of b. In the present context, this means this means
that every operator has a representative constructed only from matter fields and gravity
together with the ghost field c. Usually, one is primarily interested in operators of ghost
number zero. The reason is that as explained in Appendix B.2, normally physical states
are defined at just one value of the ghost number (the maximum value, in the case of de
Sitter space) and hence an operator of nonzero ghost number has vanishing matrix elements
between physical states. An operator of ghost number zero, in its representative that does
not contain factors of b, automatically also does not depend on c; in other words, such
an operator is constructed from matter fields and gravity only. If O is an operator that
is constructed without any use of either b or c, then the condition [Q, O} = 0 reduces to
[ta , O] = 0. In other words, O must be GdS -invariant.
      So while it is subtle to impose the de Sitter constraints on physical states, it is straight-
forward to impose the constraints on operators: an operator that acts on the constrained
system is simply an operator on the unconstrained system that commutes with the con-
straints. This was assumed in the main body of the paper.
      If Ψ1 , Ψ2 are physical states of the constrained system and O is an operator of the
constrained system, then
                                  ⟨Ψ1 |gOg −1 |Ψ2 ⟩ = ⟨Ψ1 |O|Ψ2 ⟩,                          (B.17)
since physical states were defined to satisfy g −1 Ψ1 = Ψ1 , g −1 Ψ2 = Ψ2 (mod {Q, · · · }).
    We have described this construction for the case of imposing constraints under the full
group GdS , but the same ideas apply for imposing constraints under a subgroup such as
the symmetry group GP of a static patch P . That case is actually much more simple. One
has GP = Rt × SO(D − 1), where Rt is the group of time translations of the static patch
and SO(D − 1) is a group of rotations. The group SO(D − 1) is compact, which means that
there is no analytical difficulty in defining and understanding the BRST cohomology for
SO(D−1) at either the top or bottom value of the ghost number (and these two cohomology
groups are actually naturally isomorphic). The group Rt of time translations of the static
patch is abelian. The group averaging procedure for this abelian group is straightforward
and was actually implemented in section 4.
    A subtlety in all this accounts for a difficulty that we had in section 4.3. As we
have explained, it is possible to identify operators that commute with a set of constraints
without first defining a Hilbert space that these operators act on. What one gets this way




                                              – 51 –
is an algebra B0 , but not a von Neumann algebra. To define a von Neumann algebra, one
has to construct a Hilbert space H    b that B0 acts on, and then one can complete B0 to a
von Neumann algebra B of operators on H.       b In general, B depends on H.   b In the main
                                                                         2
example of the present paper, we start with a Hilbert space HdS ⊗ L (R) ⊗ K, where HdS
is a Hilbert space of fields in de Sitter space, L2 (R) is the Hilbert space of an observer in
P , and K is the Hilbert space of a possible observer in the complementary patch P ′ . An
algebra A of the static patch acts on H. We consider a constraint H     b = H + q − k, where
H generates the time translation symmetry of the patch P , q is the Hamiltonian of the
observer in P , and k acts on K. There are two cases of interest: either K is a second copy
L2 (R)′ of L2 (R) and k = q ′ is the Hamiltonian of an observer in P ′ , or K = C, k = 0.
Operators on HdS ⊗ L2 (R) that commute with the constraint are eipH ae−ipH and (bounded
functions of) q, where p = −id/dq and a ∈ A. These generate an algebra B0 , which does
not depend on whether there is an observer present in P ′ . However, the completion of B0
to a von Neumann algebra B does depend on the presence of an observer in P ′ . In the case
K = L2 (R)′ , k = q ′ , B is the projected crossed product algebra of Type II1 that we have
studied in this article. In this case, the Hilbert space H
                                                         b of coinvariants, as a representation
of B, has a “continuous dimension” in the sense of Murray and von Neumann that can be
any positive real number d, depending on what we assume for the range of values of q ′ .
But in case K = C, k = 0, in the limit GN → 0, by conjugating by e−ipH , we can reduce
to the case that the constraint is just q and the Hilbert space H   b obtained after imposing
the constraint is the original Hilbert space HdS . In that description, B0 is generated by
A and H, and its von Neumann algebra completion is the Type I algebra of all bounded
operators on H. This is an unreasonable result, since the algebra of operators accessible
to an observer in P should not depend in this way on whether there is an observer in
P ′ . Having no observer in the second patch is similar to taking the limit d → 0 for the
continuous dimension of the Hilbert space, but that limit is not possible for an algebra of
Type II1 ; that is why we seem to get a different algebra in the patch P when there is no
observer in P ′ . We suggested in section 4.3 that actually it is not possible in this problem
to take a strict limit GN → 0, and that in the absence of an observer in P ′ , the continuous
dimension of H  b is d ∼ G1/2 .
                           N


References
 [1] J. D. Bekenstein, “Black Holes and the Second Law,” Lett. Nuovo Cim. 4 (1972) 737-740.
 [2] S. W. Hawking, “Particle Clreation By Black Holes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 43 (1975)
     199-220.
 [3] G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking, “Cosmological Event Horizons, Thermodynamics, and
     Particle Creation,” Phys. Rev. D15 (1977) 2738-2751.
 [4] R. Figari, R. Hoegh-Krohn, and C. R. Nappi, “Interacting Relativistic Boson Fields in the
     De Sitter Universe With Two Space-Time Dimensions,” Commun. Math. Phys. 44 (1975)
     265-278.
 [5] A. Almheiri, T. Hartman, J. Maldacena, E. Shaghoulian, and A. Tajdini, “The Entropy of
     Hawking Radiation,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 93 (2021) 035002, arXiv:2006.06872.




                                            – 52 –
 [6] R. Bousso, “Positive Vacuum Energy and the N Bound,” JHEP 11 (2000) 038,
     hep-th/0012052.
 [7] R. Bousso, “Bekenstein Bounds in de Sitter and Flat Space,” JHEP 04 (2001) 035,
     hep-th/0010252.
 [8] T. Banks, “Cosmological Breaking of Supersymmetry? Or Little Lambda Goes Back to the
     Future, II,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A16 (2001) 910-921, hep-th/0007146.
 [9] T. Banks and W. Fischler, “M -Theory Observables For Cosmological Spacetimes,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0102077.
[10] T. Banks, “More Thoughts on the Quantum Theory of Stable de Sitter Space,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0503066.
[11] T. Banks, B. Fiol, and A. Morisse, “Towards a Quantum Theory of de Sitter Space,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0609062.
[12] T. Banks and W. Fischler, “The Holographic Model Of Cosmology,” arXiv:1806.01749.
[13] L. Susskind, “De Sitter Holography: Fluctuations, Anomalous Symmetry, and Wormholes,”
     Universe 7 (2021) 464, arXiv:2106.03964.
[14] L. Susskind, “Black Holes Hint Towards De Sitter-Matrix Theory,” arXiv:2109.01322.
[15] K. Maede, T. Koike, M. Narita, A. Ishibashi, “Upper bound for entropy in asymptotically de
     Sitter space-time,” Phys. Rev. D 57(6) (1998) 3503.
[16] N. A. Chernikov and E. A. Tagirov, “Quantum theory of scalar field in de Sitter space-time,”
     Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré A IX (1968) 109.
[17] C. Schomblond and P. Spindel, “Conditions d’unicité pour le propagateur ∆1 (x; y) du champ
     scalaire dans l’univers de de Sitter,” Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincaré A XXV (1976) 67.
[18] T. S. Bunch and P. Davies, “Quantum Field Theory in de Sitter Space: Renormalization by
     Point Splitting,” Proc. Roy. Soc. London A360 (1978) 117-34.
[19] E. Mottola, “Particle Creation in de Sitter Space,” Phys. Rev. D31 (1985) 754.
[20] B. Allen, “Vacuum States in de Sitter Space,” Phys. Rev. D32 (1985) 3136.
[21] D. Anninos, F. Denef, Y. T. A. Law, Z. Sun, “Quantum de Sitter Horizon Entropy from
     Quasicanonical Bulk, Edge, Sphere and Topological String Partition Functions,”
     arXiv:2009.12464.
[22] X. Dong, E. Silverstein, and G. Torroba, “De Sitter Holography and Entanglement Entropy,”
     arXiv:1804.08623.
[23] H. Lin and L. Susskind, “Infinite Temperature’s Not So Hot,” arXiv:2206.01083.
[24] S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, “Causal Connectability Between Quantum Systems and the
     Black Hole Interior in Holographic Duality,” arXiv:2110.05497.
[25] S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, “Emergent Times in Holographic Duality,” arXiv:2112.12156.
[26] E. Witten, “Gravity and the Crossed Product,” arXiv:2112.12828.
[27] R. Sorkin, “On The Entropy of the Vacuum Outside a Horizon,” in B. Bertotti, F. de Felice
     and A. Pascolini, eds., Tenth International Conference on General Relativity and Gravitation
     (Padova, July 4-9, 1983), Contributed Papers, vol. II, pp. 734-736 (Roma, Consiglio
     Nazionale Delle Ricerche, 1983), available at arXiv:1402.3589.




                                             – 53 –
[28] L. Bombelli, R. K. Koul, Joohan Lee, and R. Sorkin, “Quantum Source of Entropy for Black
     Holes,” Phys. Rev. D34 (1986) 373-383.
[29] H. Araki, “Type of von Neumann Algebras Associated to the Free Field,” Prog. Theoret.
     Phys. 32 (1964) 956.
[30] I. E. Segal, “A Note On The Concept Of Entropy,” J. Math. Mech. 9 (1960) 623-629.
[31] R. Longo and E. Witten, “A Note On Continuous Entropy,” arXiv:2202.03357, to appear in
     Pure and Applied Mathematics Quarterly.
[32] V. Chandrasekharan, G. Penington, and E. Witten, to appear.
[33] A. Wall, “A Proof of the Generalized Second Law For Rapidly Changing Fields and
     Arbitrary Horizon Slices,” Phys. Rev. D85 (2012) 104049, arXiv:1105.3445.
[34] A. Higuchi, “Quantum linearization instabilities of de Sitter space-time. 1,” Class. Quant.
     Grav. 8 (1991) 1961 (1991), “Quantum linearization instabilities of de Sitter space-time. 2,”
     Class. Quant. Grav. 8 (1991) 1983.
[35] D. Marolf and I. A. Morrison, “Group Averaging for de Sitter Free Fields,” arXiv:0810.5163.
[36] O. Yu. Shvedov, “On Correspondence of BRST-BV, Dirac, and Refined Algebraic
     Quantizations of Constrained Systems,” arXiv:hep-th/0111270.
[37] E. Witten, “Why Does Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime Make Sense? And What
     Happens to the Algebra of Observables in the Thermodynamic Limit?” arXiv:2112.11614.
[38] J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, “Path Integral Derivation of Black Hole Radiance,” Phys.
     Rev. D13 (1976) 2188-2203.
[39] W. Israel, “Thermo-field Dynamics Of Black Holes,” Phys. Lett. 57 (1976) 107-110.
[40] W. G. Unruh, “Notes on Black-Hole Evaporation,” Phys. Rev. D14 (1976) 870-892.
[41] J. Bisognano and E. H. Wichmann, “On The Duality Condition For Quantum Fields,” J.
     Math. Phys. 17 (1976) 303-21.
[42] G. L. Sewell, “Quantum Fields On Manifolds: PCT and Gravitationally Induced Thermal
     States,” Ann. Phys. 141 (1982) 201-24.
[43] H. J. Borchers, “Uber die Vollständigkeit lorentzinvarianter Felder in einer zeitartigen
     Röhre,” Nuovo Cimento 19 (1961) 787.
[44] H. Araki, “A Generalization Of Borchers Theorem,” Helv. Phys. Acta 36 (1963) 132-139.
[45] A. Strohmaier, “On The Local Structure Of The Klein-Gordon Field On Curved
     Spacetimes,” Lett. Math. Phys. 54 (2000) 249-61, arXiv:math-ph/0008043.
[46] M. Takesaki, “Duality for Crossed Products and the Structure of von Neumann Algebras of
     Type III,” Acta Mathematica 131 (1973) 249-310.
[47] V. F. R. Jones, “Lectures on Von Neumann Algebras,” available at
     https://my.vanderbilt.edu/jonesvf/files/2020/10/vonNeumann2015.pdf.
[48] N. Lashkari, “Modular Zero Modes and the Flow of States of QFT,” JHEP 04 (2021) 189,
     arXiv:1911.11153.
[49] E. Witten, “Entanglement Properties of Quantum Field Theory,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 90
     (2018), 045003, arXiv:1803.04993.
[50] H. Araki, “Relative Entropy of States of von Neumann Algebras,” Publ. RIMS, Kyoto Univ.




                                               – 54 –
    11 (1976) 809-33.
[51] D. Jafferis and D. Harlow, “The Factorization Problem in JT Gravity,” JHEP 02 (2020) 177,
     arXiv:1804.01801.
[52] M. Takesaki, Theory of Operator Algebras, vol. II, (Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg,
     2003).
[53] A. van Daele, Continuous crossed products and type III von Neumann algebras, LMS Lecture
     Note Series, 31. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge-New York, 1978.
[54] M. Henneaux, “Lectures on the Antifield-BRST Formalism for Gauge Theories,” Nucl. Phys.
     B18A (1990) 47-106.
[55] D. Marolf, “Group Averaging and Refined Algebraic Quantization: Where Are We Now?”




                                            – 55 –
