                                                           Cryptographic Censorship
                                               Netta Engelhardt,1 Åsmund Folkestad,1 Adam Levine,1 Evita Verheijden,1,2
                                                                          and Lisa Yang 1,3
arXiv:2402.03425v3 [hep-th] 11 Feb 2026




                                                    1 Center for Theoretical Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

                                                                         Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
                                                                 2 Black Hole Initiative at Harvard University,

                                                                20 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
                                                           3 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,

                                                      Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

                                             engeln@mit.edu, afolkest@mit.edu, arlevine@mit.edu, evitamhv@mit.edu,
                                                                       lisayang@mit.edu

                                          Abstract: We formulate and take two large strides towards proving a quantum version
                                          of the weak cosmic censorship conjecture. We first prove “Cryptographic Censorship”:
                                          a theorem showing that when the time evolution operator of a holographic CFT is
                                          approximately pseudorandom (or Haar random) on some code subspace, then there
                                          must be an event horizon in the corresponding bulk dual. This result provides a gen-
                                          eral condition that guarantees (in finite time) event horizon formation, with minimal
                                          assumptions about the global spacetime structure. Our theorem relies on an exten-
                                          sion of a recent quantum learning no-go theorem and is proved using new techniques
                                          of pseudorandom measure concentration. To apply this result to cosmic censorship,
                                          we separate singularities into classical, semi-Planckian, and Planckian types. We illus-
                                          trate that classical and semi-Planckian singularities are compatible with approximately
                                          pseudorandom CFT time evolution; thus, if such singularities are indeed approximately
                                          pseudorandom, by Cryptographic Censorship, they cannot exist in the absence of event
                                          horizons. This result provides a sufficient condition guaranteeing that seminal holo-
                                          graphic results on quantum chaos and thermalization, whose general applicability relies
                                          on typicality of horizons, will not be invalidated by the formation of naked singularities
                                          in AdS/CFT.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                        1
  1.1 Preliminaries                                                                  12

2 Warmup: QESs Lie Behind Horizons                                                   16

3 Crytographic Censorship                                                            20
  3.1 Review: pseudorandomness and complexity of learning                            21
  3.2 Complexity of learning in holography                                           25
  3.3 Pseudorandomness implies horizons                                              28
  3.4 Possible subspaces with pseudorandom time evolution                            34

4 From Cryptographic to Cosmic Censorship                                            37
  4.1 The size of singularities                                                      38
  4.2 Accommodating gravitational pseudorandomness                                   43
  4.3 Quantum cosmic censorship                                                      48

5 Discussion                                                                         49

A Proof of Theorem 3                                                                 54

B Proof of Corollary 3.1                                                             62




1    Introduction
Curvature singularities are ubiquitous in General Relativity: the evolution of smooth
initial data generically results in such singularities [1–3]. Observationally, however,
evidence for singularity formation from generic gravitational processes (such as matter
collapse) remains at best indirect. This apparent absence of directly-observable sin-
gularities is often explained by the general expectation that the formation of horizons
is likewise generic: so singularities are usually cloaked behind event horizons. This
hypothesis — that singularities resulting from initial data evolution should be generi-
cally hidden behind horizons — is known as the Weak Cosmic Censorship Conjecture
(WCCC) [4]. It is a cornerstone assumption of almost all results in modern gravita-
tional physics, from classical theorems such as the Hawking area law [5], to key results



                                         –1–
from the general “it from qubit” program. In particular, the expectation that CFT
thermalization corresponds to black hole equilibration, and more generally that black
hole statistics are reflected in CFT thermal states, crucially depends on the assumption
that states with horizons are typical in some measure.1 If the WCCC were false, naked
singularities could be as typical as black holes; our understanding of quantum chaos,
eigenstate thermalization, and black hole information in holography would be called
into question.
     Surprisingly, it turns out that naked singularities do exist in solutions to the Ein-
stein equation satisfying various energy conditions and regular initial data, and these
states do not constitute a measure zero set. There is by now a large repertoire of
counterexamples to the WCCC: in more than four spacetime dimensions, the studies of
Gregory–Laflamme type instabilities of [7] have illustrated the existence of “pinch-off”
singularities as the end-stage of certain black holes (e.g., the black string [8]) — see [9]
for a review; more recently, [10–13] constructed extended naked singularities in asymp-
totically AdS4 spacetimes with various matter profiles; see also [14]. A similar mech-
anism was used by [15] to construct a likely counterexample in the four-dimensional
asymptotically flat setting.
     It thus appears that horizons and singularities are not related in any trivial or
obvious way: curvature singularities may form outside (or in the absence) of any hori-
zons, and horizons may form without singularities behind them [16]. There is no extant
formulation of WCCC that is (1) not violated and (2) sufficient to guarantee the con-
sistency of seminal results in AdS/CFT such as the universality of the saturation of
the chaos bound and the bulk manifestation of the CFT thermal partition function.
     Some progress towards understanding cosmic censorship in quantum gravity was
made in [10–12], where it was noted that many (though not quite all) of the counterex-
amples also violate the Weak Gravity Conjecture [17], suggesting the possibility that
the WCCC in four dimensions is valid in the landscape but violated in the swampland.
Further evidence in favor of this conclusion was presented in [14], which constructed
large sets of AdS4 initial data satisfying the gravitational constraints and the null en-
ergy condition whose future development must include naked singularities, but these
theories violated properties required of theories admitting a UV completion via holog-
raphy [18]. This hypothesis would suggest that while classical General Relativity may
violate the WCCC, the semiclassical limit of quantum gravity does not.
     However, this naı̈ve “swampland censorship” scenario is clearly incomplete. In
higher dimensions, the Gregory–Laflamme instability is not excluded by any known
swampland constraints; moreover the inclusion of quantum corrections is expected to
  1
      This is not identical to the firewall sense of typicality of [6]. See footnote 6 on page 6.




                                                    –2–
Figure 1: The evaporation point of a black hole is, in some sense that we make precise
in Sec. 4.1, “small”.


lead to black hole evaporation, which also violates the WCCC. However, the absence
of naked singularities in the observable universe together with the top down arguments
from quantum gravity suggest that some version of WCCC remains valid: intuitively,
a commonality between the Gregory–Laflamme instability and the evaporating black
hole is that there is a heuristic sense, which in this article we will make precise, that
the naked part of the singularities is “small”. See Fig. 1. That is, naked singularities
can exist, but they must only be visible to asymptotic observers for a “short” period
of time. Furthermore, they can only exist in spacetimes that have horizons — so that
the bulk of the singularity can remain hidden.
     A formulation of such a “quantum gravitational” version of cosmic censorship –
which we propose later in this article – and its subsequent proof would require as sine
qua non both (1) a condition that can guarantee the formation of horizons in broad
generality, and (2) a definition of a “small” naked singularity.
     Point (1) is a notoriously difficult open problem. Event horizons are by definition
teleological: an event horizon is defined with reference to future infinity. Consequently,
very few extant results can guarantee the existence of such a global construct even
under very restrictive assumptions (and none guarantee that a given event horizon will
successfully hide the full extent of a curvature singularity). See [19–21] for a series
of failed attempts to construct criteria to this effect. Addressing point (1) would also
have the potential to shed light on a number of other research programs, such as
thermalization in AdS/CFT (see e.g. [22] for a review) and the firewall problem [6, 23,
24]. Point (2) has seen various approaches (see [25]), but none of those have successfully
made contact with the generic existence of horizons, since (1) has thus far remained
unresolved.



                                          –3–
    Here we accomplish both (1) and (2) in the context of AdS/CFT: we give a general
guarantee for the existence of event horizons at finite time, and criteria for the size of a
singularity that make contact with the guarantee for event horizons. In particular, we
classify singularities into three categories: classical, semi-Planckian and Planck-sized,
and we motivate an assumption on the behavior of singularities that would guarantee
the existence of horizons at finite time — via point (1) — in spacetimes containing such
classical or semi-Planckian singularities. In the rest of this section, we give a rough
outline of the central ingredients of (1) and (2).

A General Guarantee for Horizon Formation
Under the standard assumption of global hyperbolicity,2 which guarantees various con-
sistency results such as unitary invariance of the von Neumann entropy and entangle-
ment wedge nesting, there are various sufficient conditions that may guarantee existence
of an event horizon, such as exponential reconstruction complexity or chaos. However,
global hyperbolicity implies the WCCC as a consequence: almost all results ensuring
consistency of the AdS/CFT dictionary assume cosmic censorship — even though it is
known that cosmic censorship can be violated in perfectly reasonable AdS/CFT setups
(e.g., the evaporating AdS black hole). This strongly suggests that while the WCCC is
sufficient for consistency, it is not in fact necessary. We will argue for a more minimal-
istic form of censorship, which is necessary;3 it remains to be seen whether this version
is also sufficient.
     Our goal is to find a cosmic censorship conjecture that follows directly from con-
sistency of the AdS/CFT dictionary. Clearly, an essential part of a holographic formu-
lation of cosmic censorship is the holographic dual of an event horizon: we are looking
for the boundary dual to the process of bulk horizon formation. This specifically means
that we are interested in the existence of a region outside of the causal wedge of the en-
tire asymptotic boundary. The separation between the causal (or simple [27–29]) wedge
and the entanglement wedge has been previously linked in [29–31] to the separation
between polynomial and exponential quantum complexity classes in the dual theory
(see also [32] and footnote 9). Our approach to finding a guarantee for the formation
of event horizons will thus focus on reconstruction restrictions by complexity class.
     More concretely, we ask when there is a guarantee for the existence of some operator
Q in the large-N limit that cannot be reconstructed from knowledge of the causal wedge
   2
     We really mean AdS hyperbolicity here, which is essentially global hyperbolicity when the asymp-
totic boundary is included. See [26] for the precise definition.
   3
     We hope that this sentence is not taken out of context.




                                               –4–
alone, given that the latter can be reconstructed efficiently, e.g., by jumping into the
bulk, making a measurement, and sailing back towards the boundary.4
     In [33], two of us provided such a guarantee at large but finite N under certain
assumptions. The full statement of the relevant theorem will be reviewed at length
in Sec. 3.1; here we provide a heuristic statement only, starting with the most signifi-
cant assumption: that the action of the fundamental time evolution operator U of the
system is well modeled on our code subspace by a pseudorandom unitary [34] (we use
“fundamental” to refer to the full quantum description of the gravitational system, as
in [31]). In AdS/CFT, this assumption is valid whenever the time evolution of the
CFT on a particular choice of code subspace is well approximated by a pseudorandom
unitary at any finite value of N ;5 this is not dissimilar from the assumption of e.g. [35]
that the fundamental time evolution of a black hole is well modeled by a two-design
or as in [31, 36] by a (pseudo)random unitary. Pseudorandom unitaries are operators
drawn from an ensemble {Uk } that are indistinguishable from Haar random unitaries
by any efficient quantum algorithm. Our results below also hold for Haar random uni-
taries, but the advantage of pseudorandom unitaries over Haar random unitaries is that
by definition they can be constructed by an efficient process. While existence of pseu-
dorandom unitaries has not been explicitly demonstrated yet, candidate constructions
have appeared in, e.g., [34]. We will not make use of any such explicit constructions.
     Under this first assumption of pseudorandom unitary (PRU) dynamics, the theorem
of [33] considers any efficient quantum algorithm A that:

  (a) Prepares polynomially complex states |φ⟩ and has access to the action of the
      time evolution operator U on the expectation values of polynomially complex
      observables in such states;

 (b) Uses the information in (a) to attempt to learn U (or a circuit representation of
     U ), the pseudorandom time evolution operator, thereby producing some operator
     U
     b;

  (c) After completing (b), is handed the actual state of the system |ψ⟩ and is asked
      to predict U acting on |ψ⟩ using the outcome of (b).
   4
      By an efficient reconstruction, we mean one that can be implemented by a quantum circuit whose
size is polynomially bounded in the logarithm of the dimension of the code subspace under consider-
ation.
    5
      We will eventually work at strictly infinite N , but then we will work only with time-evolved states
rather than the unitary operator that generates that time evolution, since the aforementioned unitary
operator is not well-defined in the strict infinite N limit.




                                                 –5–
    The theorem states that on average — and as we will show in Sec. 3.2, for typical
pseudorandom states and unitaries6 — any efficient algorithm will fail to produce an
accurate guess for U acting on |ψ⟩.7 That is, an efficient algorithm’s best guess U
                                                                                  b for
U will satisfy:
                                    b † U |ψ⟩ |2 ≤ 1 − α ,
                              | ⟨ψ| U                                             (1.1)
where α is an O(1) constant, independent of the size of the Hilbert space in which |ψ⟩
lives. This result in particular guarantees the existence of a distinguishing operator Q
whose expectation value differs between U  b |ψ⟩ and U |ψ⟩ by at least 2α.
     We now apply this result to our gravitational setup using the fact that reconstruc-
tion is a particular type of learning. We will consider code subspaces Hcode of dimension
     a
eO(GN ) , where −1 ≤ a < 0, which do not necessarily have horizons in typical states. For
example, a microcanonical window of width O(N ); another example is a set of states
where the leading order contribution to the geometry is the same for all of the states
at least for a time of O(G0N ). We will show that it is easy to prepare candidates for
such code subspaces without obviously incurring horizons. We next assume that the
time evolution is gravitationally pseudorandom: we will define this term more precisely
in Sec. 3.2, but roughly speaking it denotes an O(GaN ) amount of pseudorandomness;
we find that this amount of pseudorandomness is generally compatible with an Hcode
             a
of size eO(GN ) , which are the code subspaces that we consider. Next, we argue for the
existence of an efficient algorithm that, as part of the learning phase, can reconstruct
the causal wedge of any efficiently-preparable state in this code subspace. Under cer-
tain technical assumptions, there is an algorithm that, given access to some CFT data,
is able to output a guess U  b for the time evolution of the initial state that accurately
reproduces the expectation values of all operators in the causal wedge. However, the
theorem of [33] guarantees that the fidelity between the predicted time evolution and
the actual time evolved state is low, which implies that there exists a distinguishing
operator Q whose expectation values differ at O(1) between the actual time evolved
state and the predicted time evolution of the state.
   6
      Caution: this is not the typical use of ‘typical’. Here we will use the qualifier typical specifically
for states in the code subspace to which measure concentration applies; this depends on the choice
of distribution of states under consideration. For example, we may consider “typical Haar random
states” or “typical pseudorandom states”. We will always note the distribution under discussion. This
nomenclature is not to be confused with the previously used ‘generic’, which refers to an open subset
of the space of solutions to the Einstein equation.
    7
      Note that prima facie, the fact that we extend Theorem 2 of [33] to any fixed, typical U and ψ
appears to contradict some of the statements in the introduction of [33], i.e., that randomness is a
sine qua non for a quantum learning no-go theorem. This appears to be the case because if U = U0
is fixed, there exists a trivial AU that just exactly outputs U0 . The point is that U0 is here ‘atypical’,
and the algorithm will fail for all other U ̸= U0 .




                                                  –6–
    Since there exists a learning algorithm that can accurately reconstruct the time
evolution of all operators in the causal wedge but cannot accurately reconstruct the
expectation value of some operator Q, which we show exists in the large-N limit,
we immediately find that the dual to Q lies outside of the causal wedge. Thus, the
boundary of the causal wedge is nontrivial and an event horizon must exist.
    We call this result Cryptographic Censorship:

          (Pseudo)random dynamics guarantee event horizon formation in typical
                               (pseudo)random states.

     This is the first general condition that guarantees the formation of horizons without
requiring asymptotic time evolution, thus addressing the first task above: the prescrip-
tion of a broadly applicable quantum complexity theoretic diagnostic of event horizon
formation.8 This result can be thought of as a quantum instability of generic asymp-
totically AdS spacetimes, assuming that typical pseudorandom dynamics are a good
model for (sufficiently long) time evolution of generic spacetimes. We may apply this
result to our two examples of code subspaces: microcanonical windows of width O(N )
and states with an identical leading order geometry at some fixed time. In the case of
the former, we find that pseudorandom (respectively, random) states in a given micro-
canonical window are exponentially (respectively, doubly exponentially) likely to have
horizons. In the case of the latter, we find that whenever it is possible to squeeze a
gravitational amount of pseudorandomness into an O(1) time band on the boundary,
an event horizon must form.
     Before we address the second task mentioned above — classifying the size of a
singularity — let us motivate why pseudorandom time evolution is natural in strongly
gravitating systems. There is a general expectation that some amount of (approximate)
randomness is crucial for understanding black hole dynamics: due to scrambling, many
aspects of black holes appear to be well modeled by Haar random unitary dynamics
or sometimes by the weaker notion of k-designs [35]. The chaotic nature of black hole
physics [37–39] and the connection between randomness and chaos [40] have strength-
ened this expectation. However, we also expect that time evolution in quantum gravity
can be efficiently implemented. Haar random unitaries and (exact) k-designs do not
have this property. We thus find pseudorandom unitaries to be a well-motivated model
of black hole dynamics. On the boundary side of the AdS/CFT duality, many holo-
graphic CFTs are known to exhibit chaotic dynamics in typical (high energy) states.
Here, we will show that sufficiently pseudorandom unitary (boundary) time evolution
  8
      Here we are defining an event horizon as ∂J − [I ], so this includes holographic cosmologies in AdS.




                                                  –7–
in fact guarantees the existence of an event horizon in typical states (and thus, by
definition, of a black hole).9
    Thus far we have argued that pseudorandomness is a valid model for time evolution
of strongly gravitating systems using established facts about black holes. We shall
postpone motivating pseudorandomness as a model for time evolution in the context of
naked singularities until we have defined what we mean by “large” and “small” naked
singularities. We therefore proceed to give an overview of this second task.

Size of a Naked Singularity
Intuitively, the naked singularities that we would like quantum gravity to exclude are
classically extended with divergent curvatures, and emitting large amounts of observ-
able, causally propagating radiation as prescribed by some fundamental quantum grav-
ity evolution.
     In many cases, such large curvatures create (quantum) trapped surfaces and (quan-
tum) extremal surfaces. In [41], unitary invariance of SvN in the dual CFT was used to
prove that classical extremal (and trapped) surfaces resulting from classical singulari-
ties that do not “evaporate” must lie behind horizons in AdS/CFT. As a warmup, we
will prove that even upon inclusion of quantum corrections and under no restrictions
on the behavior of the singularity, quantum extremal surfaces (QESs) generically lie
behind horizons. The argument makes essential use of the geometrization of regions
of high- and low-reconstruction complexity: the causal wedge, and more generally the
wedge of the outermost QES, admits an efficient reconstruction — i.e., subexponen-
tially complex in log dim Hcode , where Hcode is as before the code subspace on which
reconstruction is taking place [30], while the complementary wedge — the so-called
Python’s Lunch — does not [42]. See Fig. 2. In particular, acting on the Python’s
Lunch is an exponentially difficult (in log dim Hcode ) task in the boundary theory. If
any QES lies in causal contact of the boundary, it is possible to act on the lunch by
throwing in some timelike probe, as illustrated in Fig. 3. This is a simple task, and
thus cannot happen: QESs — minimal or otherwise — must therefore lie outside of
   9
    At this point it is worth noting that [32] also discussed pseudorandomness in the context of
reconstruction complexity: they showed that an easily prepared set of black hole microstates —
specifically black holes formed by collapse together with the application of some randomly chosen
shocks — should form a pseudorandom ensemble, and that as a consequence, boundary reconstruction
of the volume of the black hole interior (for a code subspace containing all these states) must be
exponentially complex. Our aim here is notably different: crucially, we do not start with an ensemble
of black hole microstates, but instead show that gravitational pseudorandom boundary dynamics
implies the existence of an event horizon.




                                               –8–
Figure 2: A spacetime with a Python’s Lunch. In the Penrose diagram on the left, the
lunch, causal wedge (WC ) and the wedge of the outermost QES (WO ) are indicated.
The left and right green dots are the minimal and outermost QES, respectively. The
right panel depicts a timeslice.


the causal wedge10 of the relevant region.11
     However, singularities are not always associated with (quantum) trapped or (quan-
tum) extremal surfaces. In these cases, the aforementioned result showing that extremal
surfaces imply horizons will not be useful. However, if a singularity could be shown
to be associated to a gravitational amount of pseudorandomness, then Cryptographic
Censorship ensures that these singularities induce horizons. But how can we know
which singularities are “severe enough” to accommodate gravitational pseudorandom-
ness? As a first step towards this question, we give a precise definition of the size
of a naked singularity Γ, denoted |Γ|. This quantity measures the minimal amount
of CFT time evolution required to prescribe (or equivalently, obtain) all information
about the singularity. For a timelike singularity, we furthermore show that this quan-
tity also measures how many modes within the semiclassical EFT can interact with the
singularity. Of course, the dynamics of the singularity itself would not be semiclassical,
  10
     For those readers who have previously seen the Quantum Focusing Conjecture (QFC) used to
justify why QESs lie behind horizons [43, 44], note that all such proofs to date have assumed cosmic
censorship (in the form of global hyperbolicity). We prove this result using the holographic dictionary
instead of using the QFC.
  11
     Any readers confused about the islands outside the horizon phenomenon [45, 46] should recall that
the horizons of [45, 46] are not the horizons of the system for which the island is quantum extremal
but are rather the horizons of a smaller system.




                                                –9–
   Figure 3: A forbidden situation: a QES in causal contact with the boundary.


but we argue that in the ℓPl → 0 limit, from the perspective of weakly backreacting
probe fields, a timelike singularity might reasonably be conjectured to act primarily
as a complicated UV-sensitive boundary condition for their evolution. Then we show
that if |Γ| does not go to zero as ℓPl → 0, or if it goes to zero sufficiently slowly,
then the singularity is compatible with inducing gravitational pseudorandomness in
the dynamics. With this in mind, we classify singularities into three groups: classical,
semi-Planckian, and Planckian. We speculate that classical naked singularities, and
possibly semi-Planckian ones, are forbidden by Cryptographic Censorship. Compat-
ibility with gravitational pseudorandomness is of course necessary but not sufficient
to guarantee actual gravitational pseudorandomness in the dynamics. We of course
cannot give a top-down derivation that the unitary dynamics of a holographic CFT
are approximately pseudorandom on such code subspaces, but we shall motivate this
as a reasonable assumption for generic classical timelike singularities. Cryptographic
Censorship, together with this expectation, is the basis of our subsequent conjecture
of Quantum Cosmic Censorship: that classical (and perhaps semi-Planckian) singular-
ities must be hidden behind horizons; only Planckian singularities may be visible to
the asymptotic observer.
     Let us now motivate the assumption of pseudorandomness as a model for singu-
larity dynamics (which we have previously motivated for black holes; see also [33, 36]).
A natural source of pseudorandom dynamics associated to a singularity is due to the
Planckian physics at the singularity itself — what we described above as a UV-sensitive
boundary condition. We expect such a boundary condition cannot be predicted by ef-



                                        – 10 –
fective field theory. We will argue in more detail in Sec. 4.2 that this UV-sensitive
boundary condition at the singularity could plausibly be the effect of pseudorandom-
ness in the fundamental dynamics. We expect that in many cases, pseudorandomness
is an accurate model for the boundary dynamics describing a singularity. When this
criterion is satisfied, the theorem of [33] together with the argument outlined above
guarantees that the spacetime has an event horizon.12 It immediately follows that
whenever the fundamental dynamics of a singularity are well approximated by a pseu-
dorandom unitary, the singularity incurs an event horizon.
     It is worth mentioning another potential source of pseudorandom dynamics associ-
ated to a singularity: spacetime dynamics in the vicinity of the singularity might induce
chaos in the probe fields. The paradigmatic example of chaos in classical gravity —
other than event horizons via the butterfly effect — is the BKL phenomenon [47]. This
phenomenon, which involves chaotically oscillating metric components, is expected to
be generic in the descent to a spacelike singularity [48]. BKL behavior is however only
established for spacelike singularities; it is possible that certain timelike singularities
could induce similar chaos upon approach (see, e.g., [49]), though we remain agnostic
on the plausibility of this potential source of pseudorandomness.
     We emphasize here that throughout this paper we will be considering pseudoran-
domness in the boundary dynamics. Readers interested in understanding what happens
in the situation of bulk pseudorandomness should refer to Sec. 5.
     We now briefly summarize the paper. We begin in the next subsection by setting up
notations and conventions. In Sec. 2, we prove that nonminimal QESs must lie behind a
horizon. In Sec. 3 we prove that when the time evolution in the fundamental description
is sufficiently pseudorandom, the bulk spacetime contains an event horizon. We then
apply this to the microcanonical window and a code subspace representing states with
the same (leading order) geometry for times of O(G0N ). In Sec. 4, we provide a definition
that quantifies the size of (the naked part of) a singularity, and we show that classical
(and semi-Planckian) singularities can accommodate gravitational pseudorandomness.
By Cryptographic Censorship, this would then imply that such singularities must incur
horizons. In Sec. 4, we also speculate on how Cryptographic Censorship can be used to
prove a version of cosmic censorship. We end with a conjecture for a new, inherently
quantum gravitational form of cosmic censorship that may be consistent with known
counterexamples to the standard WCCC, including the evaporating black hole. In
Sec. 5, we end with a short discussion of our aspirations and a few possible future
  12
    Note that our argument does not guarantee that the singularity lies behind the event horizon, nor
should it: we expect that small singularities can exist outside of horizons. Our techniques do suggest
that it may be possible to limit the extent to which a singularity can lie outside of a horizon, but we
leave a detailed investigation of this question to future work.




                                               – 11 –
directions. In Apps. A and B, we provide proof details for the statements of Sec. 3.

1.1      Preliminaries
Assumptions. Unlike much of the AdS/CFT literature, we will not be imposing the
assumption of global hyperbolicity on the bulk spacetimes under consideration, as this
is tantamount to assuming weak (and strong) cosmic censorship. This means that,
even in the GN → 0 limit, QFT in curved spacetime (including linearized gravitons)
cannot be utilized for time evolution. However, we will still assume that QFT in
curved spacetime is valid within causal diamonds that contain no singularities. We will
further assume that any spacetime under consideration admits an initial data slice Σ
with an everywhere defined and nowhere vanishing continuous timelike unit normal; in
particular, we require that D[Σ] contains an open set containing Σ. Any singularity
in the spacetime will be assumed to act as a UV-sensitive boundary condition that
determines the relation between the algebras of different causal diamonds.13 Finally,
we will take a conformal frame which is taken to be fixed at any value of N , including
in the large-N limit.

Assumptions on the semiclassical limit. We will also often implicitly use the
framework of asymptotically isometric codes for discussing the notion of “geometric”
states in the boundary theory. This framework was inspired by the work of [50, 51].
By “a geometric state,” we really have in mind that our bulk state is described by a
sequence of boundary states, |ψN ⟩ ∈ HN , labeled by an index N , which controls 1/GN
in the bulk. The Hilbert space HN is that of the boundary theory at finite N . In the
case where the boundary theory is N = 4 SYM, we have in mind that N is the rank of
the gauge group, but more generally it is just some parameter in the boundary theory.
    We now state what we mean by an asymptotically isometric code for our work.
These assumptions are only a slight modification of those listed in [52].

Assumption 1. The bulk Hilbert space is given by a direct sum H = Hg1 ⊕ Hg2 ⊕
..., where Hgi is the Hilbert space of QFT states defined perturbatively about a fixed
background manifold Mgi . Furthermore, the algebra of bounded operators on this Hilbert
space, B(H), breaks up into a direct sum over bounded operators on each Hilbert space
                      L
individually, B(H) = i B(Hgi ).

  13
    The singularity only has an effect on the relation between two diamonds D1 and D2 when the set
[J (D1 ) ∪ J − (D1 )] ∩ [J + (D2 ) ∪ J − (D2 )] contains part of the singularity. If this set does not contain
  +

a part of the singularity, the EFT can be used to relate the algebra of observables in D1 and D2 .




                                                   – 12 –
Assumption 2. There exists a sequence of bounded linear maps VN : H → HN such
that for all |ψ⟩ , |ϕ⟩ ∈ H

                               lim ⟨ψ|VN† VN |ϕ⟩ = ⟨ψ|ϕ⟩ ,                         (1.2)
                              N →∞

where HN is the full boundary Hilbert space. From the results of [50], we will just need
that for every bulk state ρ on B(H) and every operator O ∈ B(H), there is a sequence
of states ρN and boundary operators ON ∈ B(HN ) such that

                                 lim ρN (ON ) = ρ(O),                              (1.3)
                                 N →∞


and where ρN and ON are related by conjugation by VN to their bulk duals, ρ = VN† ρN VN
and ON = VN OVN† .

     Given these assumptions, we can more carefully define what we mean by a boundary
“geometric” state in the context of an asymptotically isometric code. Namely, we say
that a sequence of states {ψN : ψN ∈ HN } is geometric if there exists |ψ⟩ ∈ H such
that ||VN |ψ⟩ − |ψN ⟩ ||1 = 1/ exp(N ). In such a situation, we will sometimes say that
the states |ψN ⟩ labeled by N are “represented” by the asymptotically isometric code.
     In what follows, we will be concerned with whether or not bulk observables lie in
the causal wedge. We will denote the algebra associated to the causal wedge as Ncw .
This algebra is a subalgebra of B(H) ⊇ Ncw . Whether this inclusion is strict or not
is the essential point of this work. If B(H) ⊋ Ncw , then there exists a horizon by
definition.
     In what follows, we will make various assumptions about the time evolution of
the boundary theory. To conform with the standard expectations of AdS/CFT, we
will assume that whenever we have an asymptotically isometric code, then bulk time
evolution is boundary time evolution on the code subspace. We can encapsulate this
in the following assumption.

Assumption 3. Let Hbulk be the bulk Hamiltonian acting on H. Furthermore, let HN
be the boundary Hamiltonian at finite N acting on HN . Then

                               VN† e−iHN t VN = e−iHbulk t .                       (1.4)

Notation and conventions. We now proceed to introduce and review some lan-
guage and notation from the quantum computing literature, which will be important
for the formulation of Cryptographic Censorship. The rest of this section contains
notation that will mostly be used in Sec. 3. We will use H to denote Hilbert spaces
and for a pure state |ψ⟩, we will use ψ to denote the density matrix |ψ⟩ ⟨ψ|. When we



                                         – 13 –
write x ← X , we mean a variable x is drawn from a distribution X . For example, by
U ← µ, we mean to draw a unitary U (from the unitary group U(H)) using the Haar
measure µ; we will also use µ to denote the distribution of Haar random states, e.g.,
when we write |ψ⟩ ← µ. We use Pr to denote taking the probability of some outcome
                                      x←X
occurring for x drawn from X . We will often work with a parameter k, which in the
cryptographic literature is called a “key”. This should be thought of as some small
amount of random classical information that can be used to encode or decode data.
Concretely, it is a bit string that is sampled uniformly from a key space K, a set of bit
strings. The dimension of K scales with a parameter κ, which is frequently referred
to in the literature as the “security parameter”. We will always have in mind that we
are scaling log dim H = poly(κ) and will eventually take the κ → ∞ limit. A function
f (x) is said to be negligible in its parameter x if for any constant c > 0, |f (x)| ≤ x−c
for any sufficiently large x. We will say that a quantity f (x) is O(g(x)), denoted by
f (x) ∼ O(g(x)), if for some positive constants c1 , c2 and for any sufficiently large x,
c1 g(x) ≤ |f (x)| ≤ c2 g(x).14 Finally, we will call an operator V approximately norm-
preserving if it approximately preserves state norms, i.e., for any state |ψ⟩, ⟨ψ| V † V |ψ⟩
is exponentially close to 1 for sufficiently large κ. This of course includes any unitary
operators.
     Our results will make heavy use of quantum algorithms, which we now define. A
quantum algorithm A is a map from an input Hilbert space Hin to some output set
C. Note that the set C can be a Hilbert space, a classical space, or some other set
altogether. For example, a quantum algorithm could take as input a quantum state
|ψ⟩ ∈ Hin and output a classical bit representation of an operator O (e.g., the coeffi-
cients of the representation of O in some fixed choice of basis). A quantum algorithm A
acting on some Hin is said to be efficient, polynomially complex, or equivalently compu-
tationally bounded if it can be implemented by a quantum circuit of size no greater than
polynomial in log dim Hin .15 Here we will typically take Hin to be the code subspace
under consideration. We will often drop the reference to log dim Hin when describing
complexity or efficiency of such algorithms.
     Consider now an efficient algorithm designed to take in a state |ψ⟩ and output 0 if
it determines that |ψ⟩ was sampled from distribution µ1 and 1 if it determines |ψ⟩ came
from µ2 . In this case, we say the two ensembles are computationally indistinguishable
— which we define precisely for general algorithms below — if any efficient algorithm
succeeds at this task with probability upper bounded by 1/2 up to negligible corrections.
  14
     In computer science literature this is denoted by f = Θ(g(x)).
  15
     This involves some canonical choice of gates; however, this choice does not change the scaling in
log dim Hin .




                                               – 14 –
It should be clear that this is equivalent to saying that the quantum algorithm outputs
1 (or equivalently 0) with almost the same probability when acting on both µ1 and µ2 .
     Note that the authors of [34], whose definitions of pseudorandom unitaries and
states we will use, demand that pseudorandom ensembles are indistinguishable from
the Haar ensemble even if the algorithm is allowed a reasonable (polynomial) number
of copies of the state. Having multiple copies of the state is essential to allow the
algorithm to probe coherent information about the quantum state.
     With this intuition, we present the exact definition of computational indistinguisha-
bility of ensembles of states for general quantum algorithms:

Definition 1 (Computational Indistinguishability). Two ensembles of states, S1 and
S2 , in some Hilbert space H, with size parameterized by a parameter κ, are com-
putationally indistinguishable if for any efficient quantum algorithm A and for all
m = poly(κ),

                       A(|ψ1 ⟩⊗m ) = 1 −              A(|ψ2 ⟩⊗m ) = 1
                                                                       
              Pr                             Pr                             = negl(κ) .   (1.5)
            |ψ1 ⟩←S1                       |ψ2 ⟩←S2


     When we write A = 1, we are considering that the algorithm is given some binary
task (e.g., deciding whether a state is pseudorandom or not), and outputs either 0 or
1; we write A = 1 to indicate that it outputs 1.
     The specific quantum algorithms that we will consider are learning algorithms;
these are efficient algorithms that take certain data as input, implement some processing
with the goal of learning some outcome, and finally produce their best guess for the
outcome. In our particular context, the learning algorithms will aim to learn a circuit
(or algebraic) representation of a unitary operator U . During the initial learning phase,
the algorithms are given “oracle access” to some unknown unitary U , denoted by AU :
this means that the algorithms have the ability to query U a polynomial number of
times on a polynomial number of (efficiently preparable) states |φi ⟩ ∈ H to obtain
U |φi ⟩ during its learning phase. During this phase, the algorithms can perform any
polynomially complex computation between queries, on both the U |φi ⟩ from its queries
thus far, and on its own registers. At the end of this phase, the algorithms’ oracle
access to U is terminated, and they are tasked with producing a maximally accurate
representation of U or a particular aspect or feature of it: e.g., U acting on some initial
state |ψinitial ⟩ which would now be given to the algorithm.
     Let us briefly make a note on the different parameters and dimensions used through-
out this paper. In the context of AdS/CFT, we will be working with code subspaces of
dimension dim Hcode = 2κ , where the security parameter κ = poly(N ). For concrete-
ness, we will consider GN ∼ 1/N 2 , but the relation between GN and N can be changed



                                            – 15 –
Figure 4: An example where null geodesics fired from χ are geodesically incomplete,
but there is no horizon.


to the reader’s liking. We will often use N instead of κ to parameterize functions, e.g.,
for negligible functions we will write η(N ).
    Note that theorems and proofs in this paper are well above the physics level of
rigor but fall short of a mathematician’s level of rigor in a few places. We identify
these gaps where possible and leave a fully rigorous formulation thereof to the curious
mathematician.


2       Warmup: QESs Lie Behind Horizons
We will show in this section that if χ is a nonempty QES homologous to I in a space-
time (M, g), then it lies behind both past and future event horizons. The quantum
focusing conjecture (QFC) [53] with reflecting boundary conditions at I guarantees
by the quantum singularity theorem [54] that at least one null geodesic fired from χ
is geodesically incomplete.16 However, in the absence of a stringent causality assump-
tion such as AdS hyperbolicity, null geodesic incompleteness does not guarantee the
existence of horizons. See Fig. 4 for an illustration.
     When χ is the minimal (and nonempty) QES for I in M , it immediately follows
from the QES formula relating Sgen [χ] to SvN [ρI ] that bulk perturbations locally prop-
agating from I (future- or past-directed) cannot modify Sgen [χ] and thus cannot reach
 16
      Strictly speaking, the restricted QFC [55] is sufficient to guarantee this.




                                                  – 16 –
Figure 5: A QES outside the horizon, leading to a contradiction with the unitary
invariance of von Neumann entropy: SvN [ρI ] = SvN [U † ρI U ].


χ: in this case, χ ∩ I ± [I ] = ∅.17 See Fig. 5 for a review of the argument, originally
presented in [43].
     However, from the perspective of cosmic censorship, global minimality of a QES is of
little relevance. We expect that a similar result should apply to any QES independently
of its global properties. In [41] some strides were made towards this end by CPT-
conjugating the spacetime around the nonminimal QES χ to generate a new spacetime
in which χ was minimal. This allowed [41] to prove that a large class of extremal
surfaces and trapped surfaces must lie behind horizons. These results, however, relied
on an assumption that we aim to relax in this section: that there can be no “evaporating
singularities” (see [41] for the precise definition).
     To relax this assumption, we will instead assume the Python’s Lunch proposal [29,
42, 56] in addition to the QES formula to argue that (quantum) extremal surfaces must
generically be hidden behind both past and future horizons.18 Or more precisely, if they
lie outside a horizon, this distance must shrink to zero in the GN → 0 limit. Let us
briefly review some facts about the Python’s Lunch proposal. A Python’s Lunch L
with respect to a conformal boundary I is a region of spacetime defined by (at least)
three mutually spacelike separated QESs homologous to I : χmin , χbulge , and χaptz . The
first is the globally minimal QES, while χaptz is a candidate QES, but having larger
generalized entropy than χmin . The surfaces χmin and χaptz are so-called throats: QESs
whose generalized entropy is roughly locally minimal in space and locally maximal in
time (see [56] for details). The bulge surface χbulge is also a QES, but it is locally
maximal in time and space (see again [56] for details). The region L is defined as
  17
     Note that we have excluded the future horismos ∂I ± [I ] from this conclusion, as i± are not
precluded from null communication with χ.
  18
     Note that the assumption of the Python’s Lunch proposal applies to this section only; it will not
be used in the proof of Cryptographic Censorship in Sec. 3.3.




                                               – 17 –
the domain of dependence of any spacelike slice bounded by χmin and χaptz , and the
Python’s Lunch proposal conjectures that the CFT computational complexity required
to implement any operator in L scales as
                                                              
                                Sgen [χbulge ] − Sgen [χaptz ]
                          exp                                    .             (2.1)
                                               2
We will only identify a Python’s Lunch in a portion of spacetime that is globally
hyperbolic, and we will make the reasonable assumption that the presence of potential
spacetime singularities away from L does not make operator reconstruction any easier.
    Besides the Python’s Lunch proposal, our assumptions in this section (and this
section only) are as follows.

Assumptions and Definitions. We assume the following in addition to our general
assumptions stated at the beginning of Sec. 1.1:

   • (M, g) has reflecting boundary conditions at each connected boundary component
     I.

   • Smooth initial data: (M, g) has a smooth inextendible timeslice Σ0 containing
     two QESs χmin and χ homologous to I , and where χmin is the QES of minimal
     generalized entropy that is homologous to I .

   • A generic condition: if χ′ is a bulge QES and χ′′ a throat QES, then their asso-
     ciated generalized entropies satisfy Sgen [χ′ ] − Sgen [χ′′ ] ∼ O(G−1
                                                                        N ).

   • In any globally hyperbolic region of spacetime that we consider, the (restricted)
     QFC holds, and the quantum maximin [26, 57] and maximinimax [42] prescrip-
     tions converge.

   • We denote by WO [χ] the outer wedge of a QES χ [28, 58].

   • We define t = 0 at I as Σ0 ∩ I .

   • If a point p in the bulk is such that any future (past) directed causal curve from p
     to I arrives at I at a boundary time that diverges to +∞ (−∞) in the GN → 0
     limit, or if no curve to I exists, we say that p is behind an “effective future
     (past) horizon”.

Theorem 1. Let (M, g) be a spacetime as above. Assuming the Python’s Lunch con-
jecture for complexity of operator reconstruction, the QES χ lies behind past and future
effective horizons.



                                         – 18 –
Proof. Consider first working strictly within the globally hyperbolic spacetime given by
the domain of dependence of Σ0 within M , denoted as D[Σ0 ]. By Proposition 1 of [30],
there always exists an outermost minimal QES χaptz that lies in WO [χ] ∩ WO [χmin ].19
This surface may or may not coincide with χ itself. Let now H be a spatial slice with
∂H = χaptz ∪ χmin , which exists since χaptz ⊂ WO [χmin ], and let L = D[H]. See Fig. 6
for an illustration. By the maximinimax construction in the appendix of [42], there
is another QES χbulge in L that is of the bulge type, and so L must be a Python’s
Lunch (χbulge = χ is allowed). L must contain χ, since there exists a choice of H that
contains χmin , χ, and χaptz . If χ is equal to χaptz or χbulge , this is trivial. If χ is neither
of these surfaces, then we construct H by gluing together two pieces. The first piece is
the subset of Σ0 lying between χmin and χ. The second is any spacelike slice between
χ and χaptz which exist by global hyperbolicity of D[Σ0 ] and the fact that χaptz lies
strictly in the outer wedge of χ.
     Let us now return to the full spacetime M . Define a code subspace Hcode consisting
of all low energy perturbative quantum states that backreact on Σ0 at subleading order
in GN . By the genericity assumption, we have Sgen [χbulge ] − Sgen [χaptz ] ∼ O(G−1     N ) so by
the Python’s Lunch proposal, the complexity of reconstructing operators in Hcode with
support in L scales as exp(cG−1 N ) for some constant c > 0. Assume now for contradiction
that χ lies outside the effective past horizon. Then there exists a future-directed causal
curve γ from I to χ that is fired from I at a time t ∼ O(G0N ). Then we can find a
simple operator Φ that modifies the quantum fields at χ. Just let Φ be an operator that
injects a perturbative amount of matter with rocket boosters near I , so that the matter
travels along the curve γ. Because this matter reaches χ in a time that does not scale
with GN , this matter backreacts on Σ0 only at subleading order, and so it acts within
the code subspace. Φ can be constructed in two steps: an injection of matter near the
boundary using HKLL [59–61] followed by an O(G0N ) amount of CFT time evolution.
Neither is exponentially hard, and so we reach a contradiction with reconstruction
complexity of operators with support in L. The argument excluding χ from intersecting
the exterior of the effective future horizon proceeds mutatis mutandis.

    Note that there are setups where islands [45, 46], and thus QESs χ, lie outside of
event horizons. A universal aspect of these constructions is that the QES in question is
a QES of a different subsystem than the one whose horizon is under consideration. We
may also comment more specifically on each example: first, Ref. [45] found an island
outside of the black hole horizon when the CFT at I was coupled to a reservoir. In
this case boundary conditions were not reflecting, which was assumed in our result.
  19
    Outermost minimal means that there is no surface in the outer wedge WO [χmin ] homologous to
χmin with less Sgen .




                                             – 19 –
Figure 6: The setup in the proof of Theorem 1 where χ is nonminimal, and where H
is chosen to contain χ.


Furthermore, by virtue of the coupling, time evolution of the black hole system alone
is no longer unitary. Thus, while a signal sent from I initially can be turned near the
boundary with a unitary, propagating it to χ requires a non-unitary operation on the
CFT, and so the entropy is expected to change. Additionally, decoupling the CFT from
the auxiliary system produces a shockwave that alters the spacetime at leading order,
which does push the island behind the horizon. Next, in [46] an island was found lying
                 √
a distance of O( ℓPl rhor ) outside the horizon. In this case the island was associated to
angular momentum modes in the bulk, but qualitatively this construction is the same
as Ref. [45] as far as it relates to the above theorem.


3    Crytographic Censorship
In this section we introduce and prove our main result: that on any sufficiently large
code subspace, (pseudo)random dynamics guarantee event horizon formation in typical
(pseudo)random states with a semiclassical bulk dual. The precise statement (The-
orem 5: Cryptographic Censorship) is given in Sec. 3.3. In presenting and proving
this theorem, we will be agnostic about the types of code subspaces that in a gravita-
tional theory could correspond to this degree of pseudorandomness; in Sec. 3.4 we will
give two examples of code subspaces in gravity that are compatible with sufficiently
pseudorandom dynamics.
     Intuitively, pseudorandom unitary ensembles are ensembles of unitaries that are
computationally indistinguishable from the Haar ensemble. As an example, upon evo-
lution for some time longer than a scrambling time, a chaotic system is generally
expected to become approximately pseudorandom. Our argument for the existence




                                         – 20 –
of a horizon hinges upon the assumption that the fundamental time evolution is well
modeled by a unitary that is sufficiently pseudorandom on the code subspace. In a
sense described below, we will require the unitary to be pseudorandom by an amount
that scales inversely with GN , which we will call gravitationally pseudorandom.
     How is this assumption of gravitational pseudorandomness sufficient to guarantee
the existence of event horizons? We will outline the logic here while omitting many of
the technicalities (which we leave to Apps. A and B); the rest of this section is devoted
to the technical points necessary for the proof of Cryptographic Censorship and its
application to gravitational code subspaces.
     Recall that observables in the causal — and more generally, simple [28, 30, 58]
— wedge of the boundary are computationally simple to reconstruct. This is a non-
trivial aspect of bulk reconstruction in AdS/CFT [28, 62].20 We argue that, given some
reasonable technical assumptions outlined in Sec. 3.3, there exists a learning algorithm
ACW that can reconstruct the causal wedge of any geometric state in a code subspace
             a
of size eO(GN ) for some −1 ≤ a < 0. However, a theorem of [33] (see Theorem 2
below for its precise statement) combined with results from measure concentration
guarantees (roughly) that all efficient quantum algorithms must fail at predicting the
expectation value of some operator Q, which we show exists in the large-N limit,
after pseudorandom time evolution. It then immediately follows that for the algorithm
ACW , there exists an operator Q that ACW cannot reconstruct and therefore must lie
outside of the causal wedge; in other words, an exterior to the causal wedge exists —
by extension, a boundary to the causal wedge exists. Since the boundary of the causal
wedge of I coincides with the event horizon, an event horizon must exist. In Sec. 3.3,
we will formalize this rough argument into a proof.
     We start by briefly reviewing pseudorandom unitaries, as well as the appropriate
learning result in [33] that we will use, in Sec. 3.1. We then explain the required
alterations and extensions necessary to apply the learning result to the holographic,
N → ∞ setting in Sec. 3.2. In Sec. 3.3 we state and prove our theorem of Cryptographic
Censorship. Finally, in Sec. 3.4 we comment on two code subspaces to which our
theorem applies.

3.1     Review: pseudorandomness and complexity of learning
Pseudorandom states and unitaries will play an important role in what follows, so we
will briefly review these concepts. Within the context of quantum cryptography, pseu-
  20
    For the likely limited number of readers who believe in the Quantum Extended Church-Turing
(QECT) thesis outside of horizons but are skeptical of arguments relying on AdS/CFT, we note that
the QECT thesis by itself also implies that causal observables must be simple.




                                             – 21 –
dorandom states were first defined in [34]. Informally, an ensemble of quantum states
is pseudorandom if the states are efficiently constructible, but indistinguishable from
Haar random by any polynomially bounded quantum algorithm — even if that algo-
rithm is given polynomially many copies of the state. A pseudorandom state generator
G is a map from some space K into a Hilbert space H. For each element k ∈ K, it
outputs G(k) = |ψk ⟩ ∈ H. The intuitive goal of the definition is to say that the action
of feeding a random sample from K to G to get a state |ψk ⟩ is indistinguishable from
sampling the Haar random distribution of states (in the computational sense defined
in Sec. 1.1). The technical definition is as follows:

Definition 2 (Pseudorandom State Ensemble (PRS); Definition 2 in [34]). Consider
an ensemble of states Ψ = {|ψk ⟩ ∈ H}k∈K , labeled by a parameter k drawn from a key
space K, where both H and K are parameterized by a security parameter κ. Then the
ensemble Ψ is a pseudorandom state ensemble if

   • The states can be efficiently generated: there is an efficient quantum algorithm G
     that generates the state |ψk ⟩ given k as input. That is, for all k ∈ K, G(k) = |ψk ⟩.

   • The states are computationally indistinguishable from Haar random: for any poly-
     nomially many copies of |ψk ⟩ with the same k ∈ K and any efficient quantum
     algorithm A, there exists a negligible function negl(κ) such that
            h                 i     h              i
          Pr A |ψk ⟩⊗poly(κ) = 1 − Pr A |ψ⟩⊗poly(κ) = 1 = negl(κ) ,                  (3.1)
         k←K                            |ψ⟩←µ

     where µ is the Haar measure on H.

    We can define pseudorandom unitaries as in [34] in a similar fashion:

Definition 3 (Pseudorandom Unitary Ensemble (PRU); Definition 5 in [34]). Consider
an ensemble of unitaries, U = {Uk ∈ U(H)}k∈K , labeled by a parameter k drawn from
a key space K, where both K and H are parameterized by a security parameter κ. We
say U is a pseudorandom unitary ensemble if

   • The unitaries are efficiently representable: there is an efficient quantum algorithm
     Q such that for every k ∈ K and any |ψ⟩ ∈ H, Q(k, |ψ⟩) = Uk |ψ⟩.

   • The unitaries are computationally indistinguishable from Haar random: for any
     efficient quantum algorithm AU given oracle access to some U , there exists a
     negligible function negl(κ) such that

                          Pr AUk = 1 − Pr AU = 1 = negl(κ) .
                                             
                                                                                     (3.2)
                         k←K               U ←µ




                                         – 22 –
     We note that technically, PRSs and PRUs are actually sequences of ensembles, Ψ =
{Ψκ }κ and U = {Uκ }κ , respectively, each parametrized by κ ∈ N, and the guarantees
in the above definitions are for large κ. Since we will take κ = poly(N ) in Sec. 3.2 and
later sections, this aligns well with the framework of asymptotically isometric codes
outlined in Sec. 1.1. For ease of notation, we will instead simply write Ψ and U, as in
the above definitions, where the key k should be understood to be drawn from a key
space Kκ where κ is sufficiently large. We will make an exception to this rule in some
parts of the proof in App. B, where it will be convenient to make the dependence on
the security parameter explicit to take the κ → ∞ limit.
     Finally, we remark that while explicit constructions of PRSs exist (and were given
first in [34]), there are currently no known constructions of PRUs, although candidate
constructions were proposed in [34]. We will not require any explicit constructions of
either PRSs or PRUs in this work.

Pseudorandom states vs. k-designs. For the reader familiar with the related no-
tion of a k-design, we briefly comment on the two main differences with PRSs. First,
the associated notion of indistinguishability is much stronger for k-designs: the states
need to be indistinguishable from Haar random even to computationally unbounded
observers, e.g., algorithms of exponential complexity. However, k-designs only require
that the moments of these ensembles are indistinguishable up to a certain value (k),
whereas PRS ensembles are computationally indistinguishable for any poly(κ) number
of moments. In this sense, PRSs are comparable to a high-order k-design but with a
parametrically weaker notion of indistinguishability. Note that k-designs are less rele-
vant for our purposes as they apply to unbounded observers, whereas our focus here is
on bounded computations.

We now state the learning result of [33], which was briefly reviewed at a lower level of
detail in Sec. 1. This result (and our Cryptographic Censorship result) also holds for
Haar random U and |ψ⟩, but we will focus on pseudorandom states and unitaries as we
believe they present a more realistic characterization of the time evolution of physical
systems.

Theorem 2 (Complexity of Learning Pseudorandom Unitaries, Theorem 2 of [33]).
Let κ ∈ N be the security parameter, and let U be any pseudorandom unitary ensemble
and Ψ be any pseudorandom state ensemble in a Hilbert space H where |H| = 2κ .
For any quantum algorithm A of poly(κ) complexity that, given oracle access to the
pseudorandom unitary U ← U, produces (a circuit representation of ) an approximately




                                         – 23 –
norm-preserving operator21 Ub as its best guess for U , there exists a constant α > 0
independent of κ such that for any κ > κ0 , the following quantity is bounded:
                               h                i
                          avg F U |ψ⟩ , U |ψ⟩ ≤ 1 − α .
                                    b
                                  U ←U
                                 |ψ⟩←Ψ
                                 b ←AU
                                 U


Here, F (U                      b † U |ψ⟩ |2 which is the fidelity when U
          b |ψ⟩ , U |ψ⟩) = | ⟨ψ|U                                       b is unitary. In
this context, it is approximately the fidelity since we are working with approximately
norm-preserving operators.

     This theorem shows that it is impossible for any efficient quantum learning algo-
rithm to use oracle access to a pseudorandom U to produce a polynomially complex
circuit or (succinct) algebraic expression that accurately implements U on a pseudo-
random state |ψ⟩. As we will explain in more detail in the next section, we will be
                                                                          (κ)
interested in applying this result to a sequence of code subspaces {Hcode }κ each of
               (κ)
dimension |Hcode | = 2κ , where we will take κ = poly(N ).
     We now comment on two aspects of this theorem that will appear extensively
in the subsequent section. First, Theorem 2 implies that, on average, there exists a
distinguishing operator that the learning algorithm fails to predict (see Appendix B
in [33] for an explanation).22 In particular, when the fidelity between U
                                                                        b |ψ⟩ and U |ψ⟩
is 1 − O(1), then there exists an operator Q such that23

                          avg tr(QU   b )† ) − tr(QU ψ(U )† ) ≥ O(1) .
                                  b ψ(U                                                              (3.3)
                         b ←AU
                         U

In the next section, we will use measure concentration to show that for nearly all of
the unitaries in the ensemble U, such a fidelity bound holds and thus there is a distin-
guishing operator.24 This operator will play a crucial role in the proof of Cryptographic
Censorship.
  21
     We note that [33] showed this result for a wider class of algorithms — those producing any operator
U with column norms bounded above by ≈ 1 — which includes the algorithms here. We will not need
b
this more general result in this paper.
  22
     As a difference of language, [33] writes this as the distinguishing “POVM” and lower bounds the
distance between measurement outcomes obtained via this POVM.
  23
     Note that the quantum algorithm AU , as a result of, e.g., intrinsic randomness in the outcome of
measurements during the learning process, generally outputs a U      b that is not a deterministic function
of U . Therefore, we average over the algorithm’s output U ← AU .
                                                             b
  24
     The result on average in [33] only implies that a constant fraction of the unitaries in U have such
an operator, whereas we will show this holds for a fraction of the unitaries that goes to 1 as κ → ∞.




                                                 – 24 –
      Second, it immediately follows from Theorem 2 that
                                   h             i
                        sup avg F U |ψ⟩ , U |ψ⟩ ≤ 1 − α ,
                                        b                                             (3.4)
                        κ→∞ U ←U
                            |ψ⟩←Ψ
                           Ub ←AU


which crucially depends on the upper bound of 1 − α being independent of κ. This will
be important in extending and applying this result to holography, where we will take
the large κ (or equivalently, large N ) limit, and want the guarantee that the large N
limits of these states also have fidelity at most 1 − α, and thus a distinguishing operator
exists.

3.2     Complexity of learning in holography
We now turn to the application of this learning result to holography. Since our goal
is to constrain semiclassical gravitational phenomena, our focus will be on the large-N
limit in general and on quantities that scale with N in this limit in particular. For
concreteness, and without loss of generality, we use GN ∼ 1/N 2 , and consider code
                                     a
subspaces Hcode of dimension eO(GN ) , where −1 ≤ a < 0. To this end, we will take
the security parameter κ = poly(N ) such that our code subspace Hcode is of dimension
2κ . Unitary operators that are pseudorandom on such code subspaces at any large but
finite N will be called gravitationally pseudorandom (defined precisely below); we will
also resolve various technical challenges that follow from taking the large-N limit (e.g.,
with regards to the existence of certain quantities). We begin with a formal definition
of gravitational pseudorandomness.

Definition 4 (Gravitationally Pseudorandom Unitary Ensemble (GPRU)). Let U =
{Uk ∈ U(H)}k∈K be a pseudorandom unitary ensemble, with key space K parameterized
by a security parameter κ, where H is the Hilbert space of a large N , holographic
                              −1/2
quantum system where N ∼ GN , with GN the bulk Newton’s constant. We say that
U is a gravitationally pseudorandom unitary ensemble (GPRU) if κ = poly(N ).

     As noted previously, at strictly infinite N there is no notion of pseudorandom
unitaries. When discussing operators we shall be primarily interested in asymptotic
scaling at large N rather than the actual operators at infinite N . When working in the
actual infinite N regime, we will only discuss limits of pseudorandom states, using the
asymptotically isometric codes framework outlined in Sec. 1.1.
     Recall that we aim to apply the results of [33] to the holographic setup. The careful
reader may have by now noticed two potential points of concern: first, Theorem 2 was
proved on average for a PRU ensemble rather than for some typical instance; second,




                                          – 25 –
it is not obvious that in the large-N limit, for a typical PRU, a distinguishing operator
exists. Let us briefly elaborate on each concern before proceeding to state and prove
our generalization of Theorem 2 that addresses both.
      On the first concern, the learning result of [33] is a statement about the average
fidelity between the evolution of a pseudorandom state (PRS) evolved with the actual
PRU and the same state evolved with the algorithm’s best guess. The averaging is over
the unitary drawn from any PRU ensemble U, the state drawn from any PRS ensemble
Ψ, and over the output of any quantum learning algorithm A.
      While much of the literature (see, e.g., for a few instances [35, 63, 64]) does model
gravitational systems via randomly sampled states or dynamics, this approach is in
some tension with the fact that there is just one (fixed) unitary operator that describes
the time evolution of N = 4 SYM. We therefore generalize the bound from an average
to a typical pseudorandom unitary and state by bounding the fluctuations of typical
members of the ensemble, first for Haar random unitaries and states and then for
pseudorandom unitaries and states. We emphasize that this means a learning bound
applies to any single fixed unitary and state that are both typical, as we state below in
Theorem 3.
      The second concern, involving the existence of a “non-simple observable” — i.e., the
distinguishing observable that the algorithm fails to predict — for typical instances of
the ensemble at large-N , is a bit more subtle. As a corollary to our theorem for learning
typical pseudorandom unitaries at large but finite N , we prove, under a reasonable
assumption on the limit of states as N → ∞, that our theorem also bounds the fidelity
at N → ∞. Consequently, our theorem guarantees that for any simple boundary
algorithm, there exists a semiclassical observable that cannot be reconstructed by the
algorithm.

We now state the holographic version of Theorem 2, incorporating the generalizations
advertised above. We will subsequently use this version in Sec. 3.3 to prove Crypto-
graphic Censorship.
    Consider a CFT with a large but finite UV energy cutoff, so that when N is finite
the dimension of the Hilbert space is finite.25 We prove the theorem below for any
large but finite value of N , under the assumption that the algorithm’s output as a
function of U is (randomized) K-Lipschitz for some fixed constant K. We will describe
this assumption in greater length in App. A, but it boils down to a certain notion
of continuity controlled by a parameter K of the algorithm as a function of U .26 We
  25
    We are free to consider other ways of regulating the dimension of the Hilbert space if needed.
  26
    It is possible that this assumption actually follows directly from our other assumptions; we leave
determination of this question to future work.




                                               – 26 –
subsequently state and prove a corollary of this theorem for infinite-dimensional Hilbert
spaces, under a class of assumptions. To increase readability, we postpone both of the
proofs to Apps. A and B.

Theorem 3 (Complexity of Learning for Typical Pseudorandom Unitaries). Let κ =
poly(N ) and consider a code subspace of dimension 2κ . Consider any (gravitation-
ally) pseudorandom unitary ensemble U, any pseudorandom state ensemble Ψ, and any
constant ϵ > 0. For any (randomized) K-Lipschitz quantum algorithm A of poly(N )
complexity that has oracle access to U ← U and produces an approximately norm-
preserving operator Ub as its best guess for U , and for any sufficiently large N , the
following holds: for a fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ 2 /(48(1+K) ) − e−ϵ 2 /192 − negl′ (N ) of U ∈ U
                                         2 κ         2       2 κ


and |ψ⟩ ∈ Ψ, we have that:

  1. the following quantity is bounded
                          h               i
                     avg F U |ψ⟩ , U  b |ψ⟩ ≤ 1 − α + 2ϵ + negl(N ) ,                (3.5)
                     b ←AU
                     U

     where α is a constant independent of N , and

  2. there exists an operator Q (which may depend on U , |ψ⟩, and U
                                                                  b ) such that

                 avg tr(QU   b )† ) − tr(QU ψ(U )† ) ≥ 2α − 4ϵ − negl(N ) .
                         b ψ(U                                                       (3.6)
                b ←AU
                U


Proof. See App. A.

    We now extend this theorem to infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces. For this pur-
pose, in what follows, we reinstate the sequences of PRSs and PRUs to make the
N -dependence explicit. We now assume that for every N we have a code subspace HN
on which the time evolution operator e−iHN t of the CFT, for some t (possibly scaling
with N ), has the same matrix elements on the code subspace as another unitary op-
erator UN : HN → HN , up to exponential corrections. As in Assumption 2, we also
assume that there exists an asymptotically isometric code with map VN from the bulk
Hilbert space, H, to HN . Furthermore, we assume there exists a (gravitationally) PRU
ensemble {UN }N and some N0 such that for all N ≥ N0 , the ensemble UN contains UN
as a typical member.
    Next, we assume there exists a sequence of pseudorandom states {|ψN ⟩ ∈ HN }N
that are represented on the code. Namely, there exists a |ξ⟩ ∈ H such that for every
|ψN ⟩ in the sequence with sufficiently large N , |ψN ⟩ = VN |ξ⟩ up to exponentially small
corrections in the one-norm. Finally, letting the learning algorithm’s best guess for UN



                                         – 27 –
be UbN , we assume that U   bN |ψN ⟩ is also represented by the asymptotically isometric
                           ˆ
code, i.e., there exists a ξ such that U               ˆ We also assume that the subset
                                        bN |ψN ⟩ = VN |ξ⟩.
of states at finite N that are the fraction of states that are typical converge to a subset
of states in the infinite-N Hilbert space that is of measure 1 (as the fraction of typical
states limits to 1 as N → ∞ in Theorem 3).

Corollary 3.1 (Distinguishing Operator at N → ∞). Let {UN |ψN ⟩}N and {U     bN |ψN ⟩}N
be two sequences of states that are represented on the code, namely there exist |ξ⟩ and
 ˆ such that UN |ψN ⟩ = VN |ξ⟩ and U
|ξ⟩                                                     ˆ Furthermore, assume that
                                        bN |ψN ⟩ = VN |ξ⟩.
{UN |ψN ⟩}N and {UbN |ψN ⟩}N satisfy the assumptions stated above, then both 1. and 2.
                                                ˆ In particular, by taking the constant
in Theorem 3 also hold for the states |ξ⟩ and |ξ⟩.
                                 ˆ the existence of an operator Q ∈ B(H) such that
ϵ to be < α/2, we have for any |ξ⟩

                                     ˆ − tr(Qξ) ≥ O(1) .
                             avg tr(Qξ)
                              ξb


Proof. See App. B.


3.3    Pseudorandomness implies horizons
We are now ready to argue that when time evolution in the boundary theory is suffi-
ciently (i.e., gravitationally) pseudorandom, the bulk has an event horizon. Recall that
the logic in this argument is that for a typical pseudorandom time evolution opera-
tor U , (a) efficient quantum learning algorithms cannot accurately compute the time
evolution of ⟨Q⟩ for some operator Q that may depend on U , and (b) there exists an
efficient quantum algorithm that can accurately compute the time evolution of all local
operators — i.e., operators in the causal wedge — under U . Point (a) follows directly
from Corollary 3.1.
     Point (b) is in a sense obvious holographically given the developments on complex-
ity of reconstruction in AdS/CFT. The general expectation following from [30] is that
a simple quantum algorithm should be able to reconstruct the causal wedge. We might
worry that the existence of a naked singularity complicates this story, but there is a
simple physical argument suggesting otherwise. To measure an operator in the causal
wedge, we can send rocket ships from the conformal boundary that travel into the bulk,
carry out measurements anywhere in the causal wedge, and then travel back out to the
boundary with the result. Since we are only interested in measuring operators that
survive at strictly infinite N , the complexity to implement these rocket ships from the




                                          – 28 –
Figure 7: In the leftmost and middle panels, the reconstruction of operators inside the
green wedge (which is globally hyperbolic) can be done using the HKLL protocol, which
should be simple, insofar as we can compute the expectation values of local operators
in the boundary theory on the time band ∆t. We can keep doing this for subsequent
time bands until we have reconstructed the full causal wedge, as in the rightmost panel.
We use this as an ingredient to motivate the existence of an algorithm that can output
an operator V which reproduces the time evolution of operators in the causal wedge.


CFT should not scale exponentially with N .27 Under the assumption that there exists
an efficient process that can produce a guess V for the time evolution operator U using
these measurements, we can then combine this with point (a) above to formulate our
theorem of Cryptographic Censorship, Theorem 5 below.
     In many cases, we can motivate this assumption — the existence of an efficient
learning algorithm that can produce such a guess V — from a computer science point of
view. For instance, consider first a domain of dependence corresponding to a boundary
time band. If we have access to the time-evolved expectation values of single-trace
operators in that time band, we can use the HKLL protocol [59–61] to reconstruct this
domain of dependence. See Fig. 7. In the case where the causal wedge can be generated
from a union of such wedges, and if there exists a simple algorithm that can aggregate
all these reconstructed wedges into a guess for the time evolution operator, then we
can efficiently reconstruct the full causal wedge. There is in fact a learning algorithm
that comes close to providing such a guess V , as we will explain in more detail below;
this thus provides strong motivation that learning the causal wedge is simple, even in
  27
     One might worry that the bulk measurements take too long for the rocket ships to be able to
get back out to the boundary. Again, this should not be the case for bulk operators that survive the
infinite N limit.




                                              – 29 –
Figure 8: The region of spacetime inside this cylindrical naked singularity does not
lie inside of any HKLL wedge. It is possible, however, for a rocket ship to enter the
region behind the singularity and come back out to the boundary.


the presence of such naked singularities.
    However, it is possible that there exist naked singularities with unusual topologies
where this reasoning falls short and we cannot use this ‘progressive HKLL’ protocol
combined with the aforementioned existing learning algorithm. An illustration of such a
hypothetical singularity is given in Fig. 8, where the interior of a cylindrical singularity
does not lie inside any HKLL wedge. In such cases, however, we revert to our initial
holographic reasoning to motivate our assumption: we can still use rocket ships to
measure operators in the entire causal wedge.
    For the case where HKLL in progressive wedges does work, we will now illustrate
more precisely that under a mild technical assumption, there exists a quantum learning
algorithm satisfying the assumptions of Theorem 2 that, given oracle access to U , can
output an operator V where V |ψ⟩ can accurately reproduce the expectation values
of all simple operators in the state U |ψ⟩. Applicability to our strengthened version,
Theorem 3, does not immediately follow and would require techniques from measure
concentration. This falls outside the scope of the current work, but we expect that this
may go through if the algorithm in [65] satisfies certain assumptions. Readers willing
to accept the existence of the relevant algorithm — i.e., an efficient algorithm for
reconstructing the causal wedge — can skip directly to the statement of Cryptographic
Censorship, Theorem 5 below.

Efficiently learning the causal wedge. The starting point for our argument for
(b) is the learning algorithm of [65], which we review below, together with the assump-




                                          – 30 –
tion referenced above that allows us to bridge the gap between [65]’s work and our
Theorem 2.
    Given an n-qubit system with n large, the authors of [65] showed that there exists
an efficient learning algorithm that can learn a bounded degree representation of any
unknown operator O(unk) . The bounded degree representation O(k) takes the form of
                                          X
                                  O(k) =       αP P ,                            (3.7)
                                          P :|P |≤k

where P is a Pauli operator given by a string of Pauli operators X, Y , Z, or I at each
site, and k is a constant (independent of n). By |P | we mean the number of qubits
that are acted on non-trivially by P . A bounded-degree operator is then just a sum of
individual Pauli operators with |P | not scaling with n in any way.
     The algorithm of [65] works by forming a guess for the coefficients of the unknown
operator O(unk) in the Pauli basis, using a polynomial or subexponential number of
measurements involving the operator. The authors show that this guess O(k) for the
operator reproduces the correct expectation values in certain distributions of quantum
states. Quantitatively:

Theorem 4 (Theorem 13 of [65]). There exists an algorithm that, for any n, ε, δ > 0,
any unknown n-qubit observable O(unk) and any n-qubit state distribution D that is
                                                                          
invariant under single qubit gates, given training data {ρℓ , tr O(unk) ρℓ }M
                                                                            ℓ=1 of size
                                      n           1
                             M = log        2O(log( ε ) log(n)) ,                     (3.8)
                                        δ
the algorithm is of poly(M ) complexity and can learn a function h(ρ) that achieves a
prediction error
                                             2              2
                       avg h(ρ) − tr O(unk) ρ ≤ ε O(unk) ,                      (3.9)
                       ρ ←D


with probability at least 1 − δ. Here, O(unk) is the operator norm of O(unk) . In
particular, the algorithm produces a bounded-degree operator O(k) = P :|P |≤k αP P and
                                                                   P

thereby learns h(ρ) := tr(O(k) ρ).

One example of such a distribution D is the distribution of Haar random states, which
is of particular relevance to our setting.
     In general, a bounded-degree operator is any operator of the form in (3.7). In the
context of AdS/CFT, we expect that bounded-degree operators correspond to local op-
erators in the CFT. In particular, expectation values of these operators fully determine
the causal wedge of the entire boundary in the large-N limit. Recall that our aim is the



                                          – 31 –
illustration of an algorithm that falls under the purview of Theorem 2 and can learn a
V that approximates the time-evolved expectation values of bounded-degree operators
under U . Taking O(unk) = U , the algorithm in the above theorem (given the specified
training data) learns an operator U (k) such that

                                          tr(U (k) ρ) ≈ tr(U ρ)                                 (3.10)

(on average over ρ). Note that this algorithm requires access to training data comprised
of expectation values of the unknown operator O(unk) = U in a collection of states {ρℓ }.
We expect that there exists an efficient algorithm to estimate the expectation values
of U in this collection of efficiently preparable states given oracle access to U so that
the learning algorithm in Theorem 4 then falls under the purview of Theorem 2.
     In order to obtain a guarantee that this U (k) is such a V , we will make a mild
assumption that (3.10) holds when multiple operators are concatenated. In general,
we may expect that for any operators O1 , O2 , O3 , using the learning algorithm in the
                               (k)   (k)   (k)
theorem above to produce O1 , O2 , O3 , the following holds:
                                    (k)   (k)   (k)
                              tr(O1 O2 O3 ρ) ≈ tr(O1 O2 O3 ρ) .

However, to bridge the gap to Theorem 2, it suffices that the U (k) produced by the
algorithm satisfies the following for any bounded-degree operator O:

                               tr((U (k) )† OU (k) ρ) ≈ tr(U † OU ρ) ,                          (3.11)

where the error scales with 1/N if the algorithm complexity is subexponential in N ,
which is a complexity to which Theorem 2 (and its strengthening Theorem 3) can be
applied.28 The upshot is that under the assumption (3.11) above, there is an efficient
algorithm that obeys the assumptions of Theorem 229 and outputs a guess V = U (k)
for the time evolution unitary U , which correctly predicts expectation values of local
operators in the CFT, up to polynomial corrections in 1/N .
    To summarize: we use the above (and expectations from holography) to motivate
that there exists an algorithm, which we will call ACW , that can always learn time
evolution within the causal wedge but falls under the purview of Theorem 2, which
guarantees that for pseudorandom time evolution, this algorithm cannot learn the time
  28
     Note that although in previous sections we have considered polynomial complexity algorithms, we
expect our results there to also apply to algorithms of subexponential complexity.
  29
     Note that strictly speaking, Theorem 2 only applies to this algorithm if V is approximately norm-
preserving. By taking e.g. O = I in (3.11) (which holds for most ρ in the Haar distribution), we expect
that the guess V should satisfy this condition.




                                                 – 32 –
evolution of all operators. This forms the basis of our theorem of Cryptographic Cen-
sorship. Under the assumptions above, which simply boil down to the existence of
ACW , together with the assumptions of Section 1.1, we have the following theorem:

Theorem 5 (Cryptographic Censorship). As in Assumption 3, let Ufund,N = VN Ubulk VN†
where Ubulk is the time evolution operator of the bulk quantum fields acting on H. Fur-
thermore, assume that Ufund,N is well approximated on VN H ⊆ HN by a unitary UN
which is typical in a gravitationally pseudorandom unitary ensemble, UN . Assume
also (as motivated above) that there exists an efficient algorithm for causal wedge re-
construction that is (randomized) K-Lipschitz for some K > 0, and which outputs
(approximately) norm-preserving operators. Let |ψN (t)⟩ be a state at any time t whose
complete time evolution is dual to a strongly causal geometric bulk (M, g).30 Under the
assumption that UN |ψN (t)⟩ is itself the image of a bulk state |ψ(t′ )⟩ under VN , then if
there exists a single time t such that UN |ψN (t)⟩ is typical in the pseudorandom state
ensemble Ψ = UN |ψN (t)⟩,31 then there is an event horizon in (M, g).

Proof. Let UN be the pseudorandom unitary approximating VN e−iHbulk ∆t VN† over a time
∆t. Let the fundamental quantum state of the system be |ψN (t)⟩ at some initial
time t, and |ψN (t′ )⟩ = UN |ψN (t)⟩ at some time t′ = t + ∆t. Let the bulk duals be
|ψ(t)⟩ and |ψ(t′ )⟩ such that |ψN (t)⟩ = VN |ψ(t)⟩ and |ψN (t′ )⟩ = VN |ψ(t′ )⟩. See Fig. 9.
By assumption, we can find a t such that |ψN (t′ )⟩ is typical in the PRS ensemble
Ψ = UN |ψN (t)⟩.
     Consider a particular (possibly randomized) algorithm, AUCW    N
                                                                      , which by the rea-
soning and assumptions above based on Theorem 4 we can choose to correctly predict
the values of all operators O that are in the causal wedge algebra Ncw for any output
bN ← AUN . By Corollary 3.1, on average over the U
U                                                          bN there exists a distinguish-
           CW
ing bulk operator, Q∗ ∈ B(H), which distinguishes between the bulk states |ψ(t′ )⟩ and
 b ′ )⟩ such that UN |ψN (t)⟩ = VN |ψ(t′ )⟩ and U
|ψ(t                                                               b ′ )⟩. Thus there must
                                                bN |ψN (t)⟩ = VN |ψ(t
exist at least one UbN for which the corresponding Q∗ distinguishes between |ψ(t′ )⟩ and
 b ′ )⟩. Note that since B(H) is the set of all bulk quantum field theory operators,
|ψ(t
we are guaranteed that Q∗ is itself a good semiclassical operator. Since, by construc-
tion, AUCW can correctly predict all causal wedge operators, the operator Q∗ must have
support in a bulk spacetime region that is outside the causal wedge. Thus a horizon
exists.
  30
       When we say that |ψN (t)⟩ is dual to a geometric state, we have in mind the definition in Ass. 2.
                                                               2 κ         2
                                                        1−e−ϵ 2 /(48(1+K) ) −e−ϵ 2 /192 −negl′ (N ) = 1
                                                                                 2 κ
  31
       Recall that the typical states constitute a lim
                                                   N →∞
(recall κ = poly(N )) fraction of states in Ψ, and similarly for typical U ∈ U.




                                                 – 33 –
Figure 9: By assumption, the time evolution operator Ufund,N = e−iHN ∆t on Hcode over
a time ∆t is well approximated by some UN ← UN , such that |ψN (t′ )⟩ is typical in the
PRS ensemble Ψ = UN |ψN (t)⟩. In this case, Theorem 5 guarantees the existence of a
distinguishing operator Q∗ that has support outside the causal wedge: there must be
a horizon (indicated by the green dotted line).

    We end this section by pointing out that we in fact get a more general result: the
proof of Theorem 5 goes through for any time evolution operator U that cannot be
predicted (in the sense of Theorem 3) by efficient quantum algorithms. In particular,
the diagnostic does not have to be pseudorandomness: our theorem holds for any U
that is exponentially complex to learn.

3.4    Possible subspaces with pseudorandom time evolution
We now discuss possible code subspaces which accommodate gravitationally pseudo-
random dynamics. We will outline two cases of interest. First, we consider a micro-
canonical window about some energy above the black hole threshold. Second, we will
argue that there can exist a code subspace where all the states have the same classical
geometry, with low energy modes on top of it, and for which it is possible to obtain
gravitational pseudorandomness within an O(1) time on the boundary.

The microcanonical window
An obvious candidate for a subspace in a holographic quantum system which admits
pseudorandom time evolution is a microcanonical window about some energy E0 ∼ N 2



                                        – 34 –
with energy width ∆E ∼ O(N ). The microcanonical ensemble defined by this window
is known to have a stationary two-sided black hole dual [66]. Here we are interested in
applying our result to any state in this energy window with a semiclassical geometric
bulk description.
     For holographic theories that exhibit maximal chaos, it is an interesting question
how large T needs to be for U (T ) = e−iHT to be well approximated by a pseudorandom
unitary ensemble. A related (but different) question is how large T needs to be in
a maximally chaotic system for the unitary to be well approximated by a unitary
k-design. For k = 2, this question was answered in [67] by directly relating out-of-time-
order (OTO) correlators to the question of how close a given ensemble is to a unitary
2-design. The authors found that if the (square of the) 2-point OTO correlator is small
when averaged over all possible operators, then the time evolution is well modeled by
a 2-design.32
     As discussed above, k-designs are a different but related notion from pseudorandom
unitary ensembles. That said, this intuition suggests that the time T at which U (T )
becomes well modeled by a pseudorandom unitary is at least the scrambling time for
chaotic quantum systems, since this is the time when the OTO is expected to match
those of a 2-design. Note that if U (T ) is ever going to be modeled by a pseudorandom
unitary, it better be at times T sub-exponential in the entropy, otherwise U will not be
efficiently generated. Thus, the expectation is that U (T ) should become pseudorandom
on the microcanonical subspace for sufficiently large T larger than the scrambling time.
It would of course be nice to know what exactly this timescale is in certain systems.
     Applying Theorem 5 to this subspace, we then see that for any state in the micro-
canonical window, |ψ0 ⟩, that is both dual to a geometric state and is also typical in the
pseudorandom state ensemble, then with a probability that is negligibly (in N ) close
to one there must exist a horizon in the bulk dual to |ψ0 ⟩. It is natural to ask what
fraction of the states in the microcanonical window this corresponds to. We cannot
give a definitive answer to this question in the case of pseudorandom ensembles; let
us just note that for Haar random unitaries and states, this would include all but a
doubly-exponentially small fraction of the states. However, since it is not clear whether
typical Haar random states can have semiclassical geometric duals,33 we prefer to use
pseudorandom ensembles. It is not implausible that a similar fraction of the states in
  32
     The authors proved this statement for an n-qubit system and the average is over all Pauli operators
on this n-qubit Hilbert space, which provide a basis for all operators.
  33
     Note that if the fraction of geometric states which violate our theorem is much larger than doubly
exponentially small, then there would need to be a conspiracy between having a geometry and the
ability to reconstruct all operators. Since we expect spacetimes with horizons to be much more
“numerous” than those without, this would be rather surprising.




                                                – 35 –
some pseudorandom ensemble would obey this property, but we shall remain agnostic
on this point in the absence of a proof of this statement.

A code subspace for O(1) time bands on the boundary
We will now consider a different subspace, where we restrict to O(1) time bands on
the boundary in order to preserve the geometry of states in our code subspace within
exponentially suppressed errors. We will start by making some assumptions that will
apply to what follows, as well as in Sec. 4. These assumptions will describe how we
construct a code subspace to describe time evolution of probe fields for O(1) times
around geometries with naked singularities.
     Consider a CFT labeled by a parameter N , such that the theory in the N → ∞
limit is dual to Einstein gravity coupled to matter.34 By this we mean that the theory
participates in an asymptotically isometric code given by VN : H → H  bN , where H is the
bulk Hilbert space of Einstein gravity perturbatively coupled to matter and H   bN is the
finite-N Hilbert space of the CFT. We are now going to consider a finite-dimensional
subspace HN of H   bN that we will assume to have certain properties. This will formalize
assumptions often implicitly made in the study of AdS/CFT, but since we will (1)
study somewhat exotic setups, and (2) apply certain rigorous theorems, we are careful
to state our assumptions.
             i
     Take |ψN  ⟩ to be a basis of HN labeled by i. We will assume that there exists a
one-parameter family of unitary operators

                                         UN (t) : HN → HN                                       (3.12)

such that for all t ∼ O(N 0 ),

                                      VN |ψ i (t)⟩ = UN (t) |ψN
                                                              i
                                                                ⟩                               (3.13)

with |ψ i (t)⟩ ∈ H a bulk state, time-evolved using the bulk Hamiltonian. In other words,
|ψ i (t)⟩ is a good bulk semiclassical state. Next, we will assume that if e−iHN t is the
true time evolution operator in the full CFT at finite N , then for any fixed t ∼ O(N 0 )
and any state |φ⟩ ∈ H  bN ,
                                                                            a
                          ⟨φ| e−iHN t |ψN
                                        i                  i
                                          ⟩ = ⟨φ| UN (t) |ψN ⟩ + O(e−cG )                       (3.14)

for some c > 0, a < 0. For |φ⟩ in the orthogonal complement of HN , the first term
is identically zero, so our statement implies that at large N , CFT time evolution for
an O(1) amount of time preserves our code subspace HN , up to exponentially small
 34
      We always assume that any effective ’t Hooft coupling in the theory has been taken to infinity.




                                                – 36 –
corrections. This is just the usual intuition that different geometries have exponen-
tially small overlaps, so unless we work to exponential precision, we can consider time
evolution to preserve our code subspace. Instead of working with e−iHt , we replace this
operator by a unitary that genuinely acts on HN .
     Then, under the above assumptions, Theorem 5 implies the following. Consider
an asymptotically AdS spacetime (M, g) where the boundary dynamics in an O(1)
time band evolve according to a unitary Ufund = e−iHN t and as in the above, can be
approximated by UN (t) which is a typical gravitationally pseudorandom unitary (as
defined in Def. 4). Let the state dual to (M, g) be typical in a pseudorandom state
ensemble. Then there must be an event horizon in (M, g).
     This is the version of Cryptographic Censorship that we will use in the next section.


4    From Cryptographic to Cosmic Censorship
In Section 3.4, we adapted our main result — Cryptographic Censorship — to code
subspaces of states that have the same classical geometry and undergo gravitationally
pseudorandom boundary dynamics in an O(1) time band. In this section we will argue
that a potential example of such a code subspace is a spacetime with a ‘large’ naked
singularity. Our goal is to connect Cryptographic Censorship to the more familiar
notion of cosmic censorship, which is roughly the expectation that naked singularities
formed from collapse must be hidden behind horizons.
    Cryptographic Censorship guarantees that singularities that are well-described by
gravitationally pseudorandom dynamics must incur event horizons. The central task
in connecting Cryptographic Censorship to cosmic censorship is thus understanding
whether — or when — singularities are associated with (sufficiently) pseudorandom
dynamics. If generic singularities formed from matter collapse do indeed require pseu-
dorandom time evolution, then they cannot exist in horizonless spacetimes. This ver-
sion of censorship of naked singularities is distinct from the original version of cosmic
censorship: even when a singularity is associated with pseudorandom dynamics, our
result does not imply that the singularity is completely hidden. This is not a bug but
a feature, since certain naked singularities do exist: e.g., the Gregory–Laflamme (GL)
instability, which occurs when a black string in D > 4 pinches off and fragments into
multiple black holes [7, 8, 68].
    In the following, we take some first steps towards connecting a version of cosmic
censorship to Cryptographic Censorship, culminating in Sec. 4.3, where we state a
cryptographically-inspired formulation of quantum cosmic censorship. We begin by
defining a mathematically precise notion of the size of a singularity, and specifically




                                         – 37 –
identify how large the singularity must be in the GN → 0 limit to accommodate gravi-
tationally pseudorandom fundamental dynamics. This definition usefully distinguishes
between a Planckian and a classical naked singularity (and similarly for non-naked
singularities of large and small sizes). This is in itself useful, as it separates naked
singularities into classes that are expected to be excluded and those that we expect
may be permitted in a quantum theory of gravity (e.g., evaporating black holes or
Gregory–Laflamme instabilities).35 Our second step uses this quantification to provide
some evidence that large classical singularities can indeed be associated with gravita-
tionally pseudorandom dynamics and thus incur horizons by Cryptographic Censorship.
Finally, we propose a Quantum Weak Cosmic Censorship Conjecture, which formally
requires large naked singularities to be atypical.

4.1     The size of singularities
We are interested in an unambiguous and diffeomorphism-invariant way of measuring
the extent of a naked singularity. Since a naked singularity can only be distinguished
from a cloaked one via access to I , it is clear that this must be defined asymptotically.
A definition on I would be automatically diffeomorphism-invariant and would more
readily admit a straightforward dual CFT interpretation. To find this criterion, we will
leverage the definition of a naked singularity — i.e., causal visibility to I — to define
what will roughly correspond to the time evolution in the CFT that is necessary, in the
Schrödinger picture, to reconstruct near-singularity physics.
    To make this precise, we first use an extant mathematical construction to single
out the singularity as a set, a nontrivial task given that the singularity is not part of
the spacetime manifold. Second, we identify the time intervals on I that are causally-
separated from this set, and finally find the minimal boundary time bands that are
necessary for a full reconstruction of the singularity. The spacetime volume of these
time bands in a fixed conformal frame is essentially our definition of the size of the
singularity in that frame. There is thus a conformal frame ambiguity in our definition of
singularity size. This, however, is immaterial for our desired application: we shall only
care about scaling of the singularity size with GN , which is independent of the choice of
conformal frame. Using this scaling, we separate the singularities into three categories:
classical, semi-Planckian, and Planckian. The first type survives the GN → 0 limit,
while the other two do not. These latter two sizes are distinguished via the power of
  35
    There is some extant literature dedicated to investigating the size of a singularity; see, e.g., [25].
These approaches differ from ours, as we are motivated by quantum computational considerations in
the fundamental quantum description of the system.




                                                 – 38 –
Figure 10: Example spacetime where the colored sheet represents a singularity. The
two geodesics γp,v and γp̃,ṽ by definition end on the same singular point, since γp̃,ṽ must
enter any tubular neighborhood of γp,v , and vice versa.


GN by which they vanish. Let us now turn to the details, starting with an identification
of the set comprising the singularity.

The Singularity Set. The primary difficulty in this task is that singularities are not
locations in some geodesically-incomplete manifold M but are rather associated to the
endpoints of incomplete inextendible geodesics in M . However, as shown by [69], it is
possible to treat singularities as if they are made up of a set of points Γ, although this
set does not lie in M .36 We will briefly review this construction, as it is instrumental to
our classification of singularities. The idea is to build an equivalence class of geodesics
associated to an endpoint. Consider a geodesic γp,v in M fired from a starting point
p ∈ M along a non-vanishing tangent vector v a at p. We will continue γp,v so it is
inextendible in the direction of v a (with starting point p). We then identify two distinct
geodesics γp,v ∼ γp̃,ṽ if γp,v enters and remains inside every tubular neighborhood of
γp̃,ṽ . Explicitly, if λ ∈ [0, λ0 ) is an affine parameter for γp,v , then for every given
tubular neighborhood U of γp̃,ṽ , there exist a 0 ≤ λ̂ < λ0 such that γp,v (λ) ∈ U for
all λ ∈ (λ̂, λ0 ). See Fig. 10. The equivalence classes under ∼ then form the points
in Γ, and we say that γp,v , γp̃,ṽ are geodesics that end on the singular point [γp,v ] ∈ Γ.
Importantly, if ps ∈ Γ, the future I + (ps ) and past I − (ps ) of ps in M is well-defined even
though ps is not in M . Namely, we say that p ∈ I + (ps ) if there is a future-directed
timelike curve γ through p and with past “endpoint” on ps , where the latter means
that γ, sufficiently far in its past direction, enters and remains within any tubular
  36
       Γ also comes with a natural choice of topology [69].




                                                  – 39 –
         (a)                               (b)                                (c)

Figure 11: Some examples of spacetimes with (naked) singularities. In (a) the singu-
larity is timelike and classically naked. Panel (b) depicts the evaporating black hole.
The non-naked part of the singularity is classical and behind a horizon. For the naked
part, see Fig. 13a. Panel (c) is Reissner–Nordström-AdS; here |Γ|I = |T− |; note, how-
ever, that Γn(I ) = ∅, as I ± ∩ I = ∅.

neighborhood of any representative geodesic in ps . Armed with a set identified as the
singularity, we now extract the part of the singularity that is naked with respect to a
given conformal boundary I as follows:

               Γn(I ) = {ps ∈ Γ|I + (ps ) ∩ I ̸= ∅ and I − (ps ) ∩ I ̸= ∅}.         (4.1)

If this is nonempty, we say that Γ is naked with respect to I .

The Singularity Size. We now proceed to classify the size of any (possibly improper)
subset of a singularity. Let Γ̂ be a subset of Γ; below we will mostly be interested in
taking Γ̂ = Γn(I ) , but it will be useful to take our definition to be more general.
Consider the sets
    T+ = {p ∈ I | ∃ an achronal past-directed null geodesic from p to Γ̂} ,
                                                                                    (4.2)
    T− = {p ∈ I | ∃ an achronal future-directed null geodesic from p to Γ̂} .

Fig. 11 illustrates some examples of these sets for both naked singularities and ordinary
singularities behind horizons.
    We will now define the size of Γ̂ according to properties of T+ , T− . We assume
that (M, g) is conformal to the Einstein static universe on each conformal boundary,



                                         – 40 –
and we choose the unique conformal frame where the boundary metric is identical to
the Einstein static universe in which the spatial spheres have radius equal to the AdS
radius.37 This fixes a unique Lorentzian metric on I , and when T+ is nonempty, we
define |T+ | as the absolute value of the spacetime volume of T+ in this metric; similarly
for T− . As examples, if T+ is a timeslice or a union of a finite number of points, then
|T+ | = 0, since these sets are measure zero. We can now define the size |Γ̂|I of Γ̂ with
respect to I as follows: first, if T+ , T− are both empty, then |Γ̂|I = 0. Second, if only
one of T+ , T− is nonempty, say T+ , then we define |Γ̂|I = |T+ |. Third, if both T± are
nonempty, we define |Γ̂|I = min(|T+ |, |T− |). This finally leads us to our definition of
classical and Planckian singularities, as well as an in-between regime, which we term
semi-Planckian:

Definition 5. Let (M, g) be a geodesically incomplete spacetime of dimension D = d+1
with a singularity Γ̂, and let
                                    |Γ̂|I ∼ O(ℓaPl ).                           (4.3)
If a ≤ 0, we say that Γ̂ is a classical singularity, while if 0 < a < d − 1, we say that Γ̂
is a semi-Planckian singularity. Otherwise, it is a Planckian singularity.

Singularity Size from CFT Time Evolution. If |ψ(t)⟩ is the state whose complete
past and future history is dual to (M, g), then without access to the time evolution
operator, we can only reconstruct operators at points in spacetime that are not causally
related to the boundary time slice on which |ψ(t)⟩ lives — i.e., the Wheeler–de Witt
patch Wt .38 Let us now specialize to a spacetime with a naked singularity Γ. For some
fixed t, generally only a (possibly empty) subset of Γ will be contained in Wt : to learn
everything about Γ (for example by reconstruction of all near-singularity correlators),
a certain amount of boundary time evolution is necessary. More precisely, if T− is
nonempty, and we are evolving forwards from the past, then the past-most boundary
of T− corresponds to the earliest time that some part of Γ is encoded in the Wheeler–de
Witt patch Wt . As we evolve forward through T− , new pieces of Γ enter Wt and are en-
coded in the time-evolved state. Finally, once we evolve past the futuremost boundary
of T− , no new parts of Γ enter Wt that we have not already seen, and so further forward
time evolution reveals nothing new about the singularity. Thus, everything about the
naked singularity can be learned by carrying out CFT time evolution through the band
  37
     For asymptotically locally AdS spacetimes where I has another conformal class, we can also
define |Γ̂|, once we pick some preferred conformal frame.
  38
     This assumes for simplicity that there is only one asymptotic boundary, and that the state of the
CFT on that boundary is pure — so the entanglement wedge of |ψ⟩ is the entire bulk. If there are
multiple boundaries or the state on one boundary is mixed for a different reason, we simply take the
intersection of Wt with the entanglement wedge of |ψ⟩.




                                               – 41 –
Figure 12: To get all information about the small singularity Γ, we only need to evolve
the state forwards in a small spatial subregion of the boundary Cauchy slice, such that
the Wheeler–de Witt patch now includes the singularity. Note that, as our artistic
capabilities are limited, we here only indicate the future boundaries of the Wheeler–de
Witt patches for times t and t + δt.


T− (plus bulk reconstruction not using the time-evolution operator). For a singularity
where T+ is also nonempty, everything about the singularity could alternatively have
been learned by evolving through T+ . So as advertised, |Γ|I = min{|T− |, |T+ |} mea-
sures the minimal amount of CFT time evolution required to learn everything about
the naked singularity. Note that |Γ|I has units of spacetime volume rather than time.
This is a feature: if all information about the singularity is available upon evolution of
the state forwards in a small spatial subregion of a boundary Cauchy slice, then this
should be accounted for in the smallness of a singularity. See Fig. 12. Note also that if
|Γ|I is large, this always is caused by a large amount of time evolution, since timeslices
have bounded volume.
     Let us now make a few remarks on our definition, starting with a question. Un-
der what circumstances do Planckian or semi-Planckian singularities exist? The most
natural case is that we have limℓPl →0 |Γ̂|I = 0 because the CFT state acquires all in-
formation about the singularity in a CFT timestep that shrinks to zero as ℓPl → 0. An
example would be the singularity in the evaporating black hole, illustrated in Fig. 13a,
or a naked timelike singularity Γ̂ lying behind another naked timelike singularity Γ̃, like
in Fig. 13b. In this latter case, Γ̂ is such that T+ = T− = ∅, since all causal geodesics
from the boundary to Γ̂ are necessarily chronal. This latter example shows that we
probably should not assign much meaning to the size of distinct connected compo-



                                          – 42 –
                     (a)                                         (b)

Figure 13: Two examples of limℓPl →0 |Γ̂|I = 0: (a) For the naked part of the singularity
at the endpoint of black hole evaporation, we expect that T± are just timeslices in the
GN → 0 limit. (b) A ‘hidden’ naked timelike singularity; here, T± = ∅.


nents, and that we instead just should look at the size of the full naked singularity
Γn(I ) , which by definition contains all connected components.

4.2    Accommodating gravitational pseudorandomness
Our motivation for classifying a classical singularity via the scaling a ≤ 0 is simple:
such singularities are visible for a boundary time that diverges or remains O(1) in the
GN → 0 limit. For the remaining range of a, we have chosen to separate semi-Planckian
singularities (with 0 < a < d − 1) from Planckian singularities (with a ≥ d − 1). In
both cases, |Γ̂|I → 0 as GN → 0, but as we will show below, singularities with
a < d − 1 are compatible with an EFT code subspace which is sufficiently large that it
can accommodate gravitational pseudorandomness, while singularities with a ≥ d − 1
are not.
    We will now show that singularities with a < d−1 are compatible with gravitational
pseudorandomness. Consider an asymptotically AdS spacetime with a timelike naked
singularity Γ = Γn(I ) . We will work with large (but possibly finite) N and demand
only that effective field theory as defined by a bulk UV cutoff be valid in the asymptotic
region. At finite N we will consider the failure of EFT due to large UV corrections as
the diagnostic of a singularity.
    We will decompose our bulk state into modes with energy below the cutoff, and




                                         – 43 –
Figure 14: From the low-energy perspective, there is an unknown, UV-sensitive
boundary condition assigned at the singularity.


we will focus on modes localized near the boundary, some of which fall into the naked
singularity. By unitarity, there must also be outgoing occupied modes as well, which can
be traced back to the singularity. However, the relation between the modes falling into
the singularity and the modes coming out is dependent on UV physics: it is inaccessible
within low energy EFT. So while the low energy modes in the asymptotic region could
be semiclassical as GN → 0, the time evolution operator that relates them is not known
in the bulk EFT — it cannot be expressed in terms of the low-energy operators. See
Fig. 14. From the low-energy perspective, there is a boundary condition assigned at
the singularity whose precise nature is unknown.39
     In what follows, we will be agnostic about the UV-sensitive boundary condition
that implements pseudorandomness in the fundamental theory. Our approach instead
will be to show that once the singularity is of classical or semi-Planckian size, then
there are enough EFT modes in a code subspace in which all of the states have the
same leading order geometry to accommodate gravitational pseudorandomness. On
the other hand, if the singularity is Planckian, we show that we do not expect this.
As our analysis is asymptotic, we do not require a sharply defined geometry near the
singularity.
     We now give a parametric estimate of the number of modes within semiclassical
EFT that can potentially get scrambled by the naked timelike singularity. That is, we
want to know the number of EFT modes that are affected by the highly UV-sensitive
boundary condition. Assume that T+ , T− are nonempty, and assume without loss of
  39
   Since quantum gravity is expected to lack global symmetries [70–72], any approximate symmetries
emergent in the semiclassical EFT should be badly violated by this boundary condition.




                                             – 44 –
Figure 15: To count the ingoing modes sent from T− , which here is the time band
[−∆t, 0] × S d−1 , we can simple count the number of modes in the strip indicated by
the red dotted line.


generality |Γn(I ) |I = |T− |. Near I , the leading part of the metric can be written

                                    −dt2 + dρ2 + sin2 ρdΩ2
                            ds2 =                          + ... ,                          (4.4)
                                            cos2 ρ
where we work in units where the AdS radius is unity, and where I lies at ρ = π2 .
For pedagogical simplicity we take the matter in our theory to be a conformal massless
scalar and assume that the system is spherically symmetric, so that T− can be taken to
be a time band [−∆t, 0] × S d−1 without loss of generality. We can now count roughly
how many ingoing single-particle modes with energy below the cutoff can be sent from
T− into the singularity. As is clear from Fig. 15, this simply corresponds to the number
of orthogonal modes in the strip given by ρ ∈ π2 − ∆t, π2 at t = 0.40 As long as ∆t is
                                                           

less than roughly GN M ∼ O(1) where M is the spacetime mass, we are always restricted
to an asymptotic range of ρ where the metric is approximately pure AdS, so the number
of modes can be counted using the pure AdS metric. We always take GN small with
GN M = fixed, and we are interested in a parametric counting that can only change
if ∆t → 0 sufficiently fast in GN so we can without loss of generality restrict to this
regime. Assume now that ũi is a collection of orthonormal flat-space positive frequency
ingoing wavepackets with mean frequency ωi in the metric −dt2 + dρ2 + sin2 ρdΩ2 ;
furthermore, we will assume that they are well localized within ρ ∈ ( π2 − ∆t, π2 ) at some
  40
    Greybody factors cause some modes to scatter off background curvature before they get close to
the singularity, but this should not change the parametric counting.




                                             – 45 –
central ρ = ρ0 . These have total energy approximately equal to ωi , as long as
                                                          1
                                          ωi ≫ ∆ω ≥          ,                                    (4.5)
                                                          ∆t
where ∆ω is the frequency spread of each wavepacket. Now, since we have a conformally
coupled scalar, ui = (cos ρ)d−1 ũi is also an orthonormal set of positive frequency mode
functions in AdS.41 Each wavepacket has a total energy approximately equal to ωi , also
in AdS.42 Imposing the cutoff ωi ≤ ϵ−1 ,43 we want to count the orthogonal wavepackets.
This is equivalent to counting orthogonal flat-space modes; this is of the order

                                          ∆t · Vol(S d−1 )
                                                           .                                      (4.6)
                                                ϵd
The numerator is |Γn(I ) |I , and in the absence of spherical symmetry it is clear that
|Γn(I ) |I is the correct replacement for ∆t · Vol(S d−1 ). So for a general naked timelike
singularity, we find that an order
                                         |Γn(I ) |I
                                                                                      (4.7)
                                            ϵd
number of distinct EFT modes can propagate into the singularity from T− . Next, we
want to take the UV cutoff to scale as ϵ = ℓ1−δ Pl for some δ ∈ (0, 1) so that our modes
are parametrically below the Planck scale as ℓPl → 0. To be cautious, we demand that
δ > 1/d, which ensures that the naı̈ve QFT entropy does not exceed the Bekenstein–
Hawking entropy. To see this, note that if V is the spatial volume occupied by our
wavepackets in AdS, then we need
                                      V                V    A
                                              = cosd ρ0 d ≲ d−1 .                                 (4.8)
                                   ϵdproper            ϵ   ℓPl

Remembering that volume and surface area of a large shell near the boundary of AdS
scale the same way as we approach the conformal boundary, we thus need

                                               ϵd
                                cosd ρ0 < O(1) d−1 = O(1)ℓ1−dδ
                                                          Pl .                                    (4.9)
                                              ℓPl

If we take δ < d1 , then wavepackets with mean frequency near the cutoff would give a
naı̈ve QFT entropy exceeding the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy for any ρ0 < π/2. For
  41
      The scaling dimension of the scalar is d−1                                  2
                                              2 , and the conformal factor is cos ρ.
  42
      There might be an overall conformal anomaly, so that HAdS = HMink + Hanomaly , but this is
irrelevant for our purposes.
   43
      This corresponds to a proper length cutoff in AdS of ϵproper ∼ ϵ/ cos ρ0 . We do not scale ρ0 with
ℓPl , so ϵ, ϵproper scale the same way.




                                                 – 46 –
δ = d1 we get an O(1) bound on ρ0 that we want to avoid, and so we require δ > d1 . Thus,
assuming finally that |Γn(I ) |I ∼ O(ℓaPl ), we get that the number of distinct semiclassical
modes that can probe the naked singularity during time evolution through T− is

                                    |Γn(I ) |I
                                        d
                                               ∼ ℓa−d−dδ
                                                  Pl     .                            (4.10)
                                       ϵ
If a < d − 1, there is always some δ > 1/d so that this diverges in the ℓPl → 0 limit.
Hence, in the regime 0 < a < d − 1, even when the singularity shrinks to zero size as
ℓPl → 0, the singularity is in principle compatible with influencing an infinite number
of EFT modes in the GN → 0 limit: it is compatible with a gravitational amount of
pseudorandomness in the time evolution.
     Let us now comment on a few well known cases of naked singularities, some of
which were briefly mentioned in Sec. 1: the singularity at the endpoint of black hole
evaporation, the Gregory–Laflamme (GL) instability [7, 68], which occurs as the pinch-
off endpoint of the evolution of higher dimensional extended black strings and other
black objects, and Choptuik’s critical collapse [73, 74] resulting from a collapsing mass-
less scalar field which is tuned to lie exactly at the threshold of black hole formation.
In the case of the endpoint of black hole evaporation, the naked part of the singularity
is not extended in the GN → 0 limit. See Fig. 13a. Thus the naked part of the sin-
gularity is measure zero in this limit, so this naked singularity is either Planckian or
semi-Planckian. In the cases of the Gregory–Laflamme instability and critical collapse,
it is impossible to evolve past the pinch-off using classical gravity, so in the absence
of a quantum gravitational description of the system, we cannot ascertain the nature
of the naked singularity. However, it is quite plausible that these singularities end up
being Planckian or semi-Planckian. The critical collapse singularity is in a sense a zero
mass black hole, which within the resolution of semiclassical gravity is indistinguishable
from a Planck mass black hole. So if we could carry out critical collapse at finite GN
in full nonperturbative quantum gravity, and then afterwards take the GN → 0 limit,
it is reasonable to expect that the singularity becomes a Planckian or semi-Planckian
singularity. The Gregory–Laflamme singularity could plausibly behave similarly: it is
highly analogous to the fluid pinch-off phenomenon, where only a minimal amount of
nonperturbative evolution is necessary to re-enter the EFT regime. It is tempting to
speculate that naked singularities in a holographic theory of quantum gravity can never
be classical, and possibly not even semi-Planckian. We will formalize a conjecture to
this effect in the next section.
     Finally, let us briefly tie this discussion back to our primary theorem of Cryp-
tographic Censorship. The fact that classical singularities are always compatible (by
our definition) with gravitational pseudorandomness provides additional motivation for



                                           – 47 –
the intuition that the dynamics of strongly gravitating systems in the GN → 0 limit
may admit a description in terms of pseudorandom unitaries. Under this supposition,
Cryptographic Censorship guarantees that any such systems — including those with
naked singularities — must also have event horizons. We leave the quantification of
the subset of the singularity that is necessarily behind a horizon to future work.
     We wish to make clear that we do not claim that all classical singularities must
act as sources of pseudorandomness; a clear counterexample is given by orbifold singu-
larities in compact dimensions. It is the ones that weak cosmic censorship is supposed
to rule out — naked classical singularities resulting from the dynamical evolution of
generic, smooth initial data and matter collapse — that we expect to have, to a large
extent, gravitationally pseudorandom time evolution. If the singularity is static, the
mode counting argument in the previous section becomes misleading. In this case, mea-
suring later modes scattered off the singularity does not provide information we could
not have already gained from scattering earlier modes, unlike in the case where the sin-
gularity is evolving. Thus, there might be a significantly smaller amount of data that
is required to describe scattering off the singularity than what the naı̈ve mode counting
argument above would suggest, making static singularities less likely candidate sources
of pseudorandom dynamics.

4.3       Quantum cosmic censorship
The combination of Cryptographic Censorship and our results above regarding compat-
ibility of naked singularities with gravitational pseudorandomness suggest a particular
reformulation of the Weak Cosmic Censorship Conjecture as a quantum gravity conjec-
ture rather than a classical gravity conjecture. This point bears emphasizing: there is
no ab initio reason that classical gravity must obey cosmic censorship. Even if there
had been no known counterexamples, one of the best motivations for the Weak Cos-
mic Censorship Conjecture is empirical: the apparent absence of naked singularities in
the night sky. Cosmic censorship is not required by consistency of known theoretical
structures within General Relativity. By contrast, if naked singularities were typical in
quantum gravity, then foundational results in AdS/CFT — such as the behavior of the
CFT thermal state OTOC being precisely attributed to bulk event horizon dynamics —
would be some remarkable conspiracy: either naked singularities engineer themselves
to mimic black holes precisely in the OTOC signature, or black holes engineer them-
selves to mimic naked singularities. A similar coincidence would be required for various
results on CFT thermalization and its bulk interpretation.44 We therefore find that a
quantum gravity formulation of cosmic censorship is both theoretically and empirically
 44
      We thank D. Harlow for extensive discussions on this point.




                                                – 48 –
well-motivated; our results relating horizons to pseudorandomness provide a clear first
step towards formulating weak cosmic censorship as an emergent phenomenon in terms
of fundamental quantities in quantum gravity. (For example, this would require replac-
ing the classical gravity notion of genericity — an open set in the space of solutions to
the Einstein equation — with typicality.)
     For completeness, we first state the classical gravity proposal for weak cosmic
censorship in AdS, which is now known to be violated in classical gravity. (It is also
trivially violated in quantum gravity due to, e.g., evaporating black holes, although
this requires violations of classical energy conditions.)

Conjecture 1 (Classical Weak Cosmic Censorship – false). [75, 76] Consider a geodesi-
cally complete, asymptotically AdS initial data set satisfying the dominant45 energy con-
dition. The maximal causal development of this initial data under the Einstein equa-
tion, together with boundary conditions at the AdS boundary, is generically a strongly
asymptotically predictable asymptotically AdS spacetime.

    Reformulating this proposal in terms of a fundamental quantum description of the
theory requires a complete revamping of the statement and the scope of its applicability.
Motivated by our results in this paper, the existing set of counterexamples to cosmic
censorship, and the top down motivation from thermalization and chaos in AdS/CFT,
we propose the following formulation of the Weak Cosmic Censorship Conjecture (below
we work in the Heisenberg picture, so a given state is its entire history):

Conjecture 2 (Quantum Cosmic Censorship). Typical states with an emergent geom-
etry in quantum gravity do not have classical or semi-Planckian naked singularities.


5      Discussion
Cryptographic Censorship is the first precise and general result identifying concrete
CFT behavior with bulk horizon formation. (While the vox populi associates CFT
thermalization to black hole equilibration,46 this hypothetical link is at best estab-
lished in certain highly symmetric and nearly static black holes.) Our first application
of the theorem guarantees that in the microcanonical window, under assumption of
pseudorandomness, states without horizons are exponentially suppressed in probability
(within their pseudorandom ensemble).
  45
     This is the weakest reasonable statement: we could assume only the null energy condition, but
counterexamples exist even when we demand the dominant energy condition.
  46
     Note that black hole equilibration was only recently established in four-dimensional vacuum
asymptotically flat space [77] for a certain range of spins and remains an open problem in AdS.




                                             – 49 –
     As an immediate consequence of Cryptographic Censorship, we obtain a partial
resolution to the black hole teleology problem for AdS spacetimes with a CFT dual.
Event horizons can be diagnosed, using Cryptographic Censorship, in finite time. The
implications are significant: first, black hole mechanics in AdS/CFT may admit a
legitimate thermodynamic interpretation in highly dynamical states. Second, as our
primary focus in this paper, we establish a typicality result for event horizons, which is
highly suggestive of a form of Quantum Cosmic Censorship. The fact that naı̈ve models
of code subspaces containing classical (or semi-Planckian) timelike singularities are
compatible with a sufficient amount of gravitational pseudorandomness serves as strong
motivation for our conjecture that typical states do not have naked singularities that
survive the classical limit. We emphasize that our proof of Cryptographic Censorship in
fact provides a guarantee for event horizon formation whenever the CFT time evolution
is exponentially hard to learn; our focus in this article was on complexity of learning as
a result of pseudorandomness, but any such sufficient source of complexity would result
in an equivalent theorem under the same proof. Below we will elaborate on potential
applications of our results and discuss some aspirational expansions thereof.

Towards a Converse
Since information escapes from the black hole interior under inclusion of quantum cor-
rections, there is no obvious definition of a quantum event horizon (since all information
eventually reaches I and causal structures are only emergent in the classical limit). It
is tempting to use our results to define quantum event horizons — and by extension
quantum black holes (i.e., at finite N ): states undergoing gravitationally pseudoran-
dom time evolution with a semiclassical bulk dual in the large-N limit. A definition,
however, would require a proof of a converse to Cryptographic Censorship: a state-
ment that CFT states with a semiclassical emergent bulk featuring a horizon typically
exhibit gravitational pseudorandomness. A proof of such a converse would addition-
ally facilitate a complete resolution of the teleology problem in AdS. The tentative
link between chaos, thermalization, and pseudorandomness [35, 67, 78–81] could then
potentially be used to understand the horizon thermodynamics47 of highly dynami-
cal black holes and the statistical interpretation of the Hawking area theorem, which
remains elusive [27, 83].

Gravitational Pseudorandomness from a Bulk Quantum Computer?
The reader might wonder: what if we put a quantum computer in the bulk, generating
a large amount of pseudorandomness directly from dynamics of the bulk fields? Must
  47
    As opposed to the thermodynamics of the apparent horizon, which are by now well-understood [28,
58, 82].




                                             – 50 –
this incur a horizon? If the quantum computer does not incur violations of EFT in
the causal wedge, then our theorem applies and indeed, a gravitationally pseudoran-
dom computer must incur a horizon. If the quantum computer generates gravitational
pseudorandomness in such a way that the causal wedge is no longer described by EFT
— e.g., if geometric invariants such as the volume scale inversely with GN as in the
“quantum volatile” spacetimes of [62] — then the assumptions of our theorem are vio-
lated, namely that the N → ∞ limit is described by QFT in curved space, so a horizon
is not required to form.
     It is interesting that bulk processes that source a large amount of pseudorandomness
(e.g., a bulk quantum computer with the power to do gravitationally pseudorandom
computations) and do not violate EFT in the causal wedge must typically collapse into
black holes. Prior descriptions of black hole formation typically involve energetics; to
our knowledge, this is the first proof establishing a causal relation between bulk quan-
tum computations and black hole formation (though see, e.g., [84] for a discussion of
constraints on bulk quantum computations behind horizons). Interestingly, this ap-
pears to bear some relation to the proposal of [31] that effective field theory requires
both an energy and a complexity cutoff: a bulk process sourcing large amounts of pseu-
dorandomness must result in high reconstruction complexity. While pseudorandomness
is itself not particularly complex to implement, reconstruction of pseudorandom quan-
tities is by definition of high complexity class. In this case, Cryptographic Censorship
may act to protect a computationally bounded asymptotic observer from detecting
large violations of effective field theory due to computational complexity by forcing
formation of an event horizon, depending on where the event horizon forms.

Stringy and Cosmological Applications
It would be interesting to consider stringy effects and ask if (and how) our theorem
might apply to, e.g., the D1-D5 system, or orbifold singularities, which are horizonless
(see, e.g., [85]). Exact BPS states have trivial dynamics: we expect that to produce
chaos and pseudorandom dynamics we would need to sufficiently excite these states. If
it is indeed the case that chaotic, pseudorandom time evolution is produced as a result
of heavily exciting such states, then our theorem suggests that a horizon will appear.
More generally, it is not clear that horizonless geometries have any relation to chaos,
and furthermore such states are probably not typical in the measure concentration
sense that we are using in this work.
      Let us also briefly comment on non-AdS cosmological spacetimes. In particular,
it is interesting to consider why our results fail for flat cosmologies, which do not
have horizons. An obvious complaint is that our AdS/CFT arguments should not
necessarily apply. They do not apply, however, in an interesting manner: the relevant



                                         – 51 –
                (a)                                                    (b)

Figure 16: The AdS-big-crunch cosmology (a) versus the flat big-bang cosmology (b).
In the asymptotically flat case, there is no notion of unitary time evolution and no
horizon. In the AdS case, we have both.


feature of AdS/CFT that fails here is the lack of a notion of unitary time evolution
on the conformal boundary (which in this case is null). Our results crucially rely on a
fundamental description of the system which is a unitary quantum field theory. This
in all likelihood does not apply to flat cosmologies. It does, however, apply to AdS
big-crunch cosmologies, and in those, we do indeed have a horizon. See Fig. 16 for a
comparison.
    What about de Sitter? de Sitter cosmologies do have cosmological horizons, al-
though those are not unambiguous in the same sense as AdS ones. There have been
some suggestions (most recently [86, 87]) that de Sitter time evolution — insofar as
such a notion can be defined — is well-modeled by an isometry rather than a unitary. A
generalization from pseudorandom unitaries to pseudorandom isometries was recently
proposed by [88]. It would be interesting to see if our results can be generalized to
accommodate this notion and potentially have some bearing on de Sitter black holes
and cosmologies; in particular, if there is any sense in which the relaxation to isometries
could be mapped to the observer-dependence of de Sitter horizons.

Some Open Questions
Cryptographic Censorship paves the way for several interesting new investigations. We
have expanded on a few of those above. We briefly enumerate a few others here:

  1. The fact that gravitational pseudorandomness associated to a quantum computer
     in the bulk spacetime must result in a horizon suggests a relationship between
     backreaction and computational power. Does such a relation between energy
     and computation exist, perhaps analogous to a gravitational version of Lloyd’s
     bound [89]?




                                          – 52 –
   2. Are singularities in general in fact associated with large amounts of pseudoran-
      domness?48 This idea features prominently in our models of timelike naked sin-
      gularities, but has traditionally appeared in the context of postselection models
      of black hole singularities and dynamics.

   3. Our definition of the size of a singularity admits a middle class of singularities
      that disappear in the strict large-N limit but which could accommodate gravita-
      tional pseudorandomness in code subspaces constructed from O(1) time bands.
      It would be interesting to understand the significance, if any, and frequency of
      semi-Planckian naked singularity portions.

   4. Explicit constructions of pseudorandom unitary ensembles to date have not been
      found. Still, as assumed in this work, we expect explicit examples of AdS/CFT
      to be well modeled by pseudorandom dynamics. Can we use complexity theoretic
      conjectures and aspects of AdS/CFT to demonstrate that holographic quantum
      systems like the Sachdev–Ye–Kitaev (SYK) model actually generate a pseudo-
      random unitary ensemble at long enough times?

   5. Is there anything we can infer about code subspace-dependent cryptographic con-
      ditions/constructions necessary for pseudorandomness from the holographic man-
      ifestation of our results? That is, does the existence of subspaces without horizons
      (e.g., the microcanonical window around the vacuum) have any meaningful im-
      plication for cryptography?


Acknowledgements
It is a pleasure to thank Chris Akers, Jordan Cotler, Jordan Docter, Roberto Em-
paran, Daniel Harlow, Gary Horowitz, Hsin-Yuan (Robert) Huang, Andrea Puhm,
Juan Maldacena, Arvin Shahbazi-Moghaddam, Natalie Paquette, Jon Sorce, Edward
Witten, and Michelle Xu for valuable discussions. This work is supported in part by
the Department of Energy under Early Career Award DE-SC0021886 (NE, ÅF, and
LY) and QuantISED DE-SC0020360 contract no. 578218 (NE), by the Heising-Simons
Foundation under grant no. 2023-4430 (NE and AL), the Sloan Foundation (NE),
the Templeton Foundation via the Black Hole Initiative (NE and EV), the Gordon and
Betty Moore Foundation (EV), the Packard Foundation (AL), and the MIT department
of physics (NE). The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the John Templeton or Moore Foundations.
  48
    See [90] for a unrelated attempt to connect singularities to holographic CA/CV-complexity con-
jectures.




                                             – 53 –
A     Proof of Theorem 3
In this appendix, we prove Theorem 3, introduced in Sec. 3.2. We begin with a definition
of randomized K-Lipschitz, which we will require our algorithms to satisfy.
Definition 6 (Randomized K-Lipschitz). An algorithm A is said to be randomized
K-Lipschitz if it satisfies the following condition: there exists a constant K > 0 such
that
                            avg ||Ub1 − U
                                        b2 ||∞ ≤ K||U1 − U2 ||∞ .                 (A.1)
                         b1 ←AU1
                         U
                         b2 ←AU2
                         U

When the algorithm is deterministic, i.e., it maps a given unitary U to a single output
U
b , we will just refer to this property as K-Lipschitz.

In addition, here we will work with operators that are exactly norm-preserving, i.e.,
||U
  b ||∞ = 1. We leave it to the mathematician to confirm that this result applies equally
well to approximately norm-preserving operators.
      We now repeat Theorem 3 for the reader’s convenience.
Theorem 3 (Complexity of Learning for Typical Pseudorandom Unitaries). Let κ =
poly(N ) and consider a code subspace of dimension 2κ . Consider any (gravitation-
ally) pseudorandom unitary ensemble U, any pseudorandom state ensemble Ψ, and any
constant ϵ > 0. For any (randomized) K-Lipschitz quantum algorithm A of poly(N )
complexity that has oracle access to U ← U and produces an approximately norm-
preserving operator Ub as its best guess for U , and for any sufficiently large N , the
following holds: for a fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ 2 /(48(1+K) ) − e−ϵ 2 /192 − negl′ (N ) of U ∈ U
                                         2 κ         2       2 κ


and |ψ⟩ ∈ Ψ, we have that:

  1. the following quantity is bounded
                          h               i
                     avg F U |ψ⟩ , U  b |ψ⟩ ≤ 1 − α + 2ϵ + negl(N ) ,                (3.5)
                     b ←AU
                     U

     where α is a constant independent of N , and

  2. there exists an operator Q (which may depend on U , |ψ⟩, and U
                                                                  b ) such that

                 avg tr(QU   b )† ) − tr(QU ψ(U )† ) ≥ 2α − 4ϵ − negl(N ) .
                         b ψ(U                                                       (3.6)
                b ←AU
                U


Proof. We prove 1. and 2. consecutively for Hilbert spaces of any finite (but sufficiently
large) dimension d, where we always have in mind that d scales with κ. Note that in the
theorem above, and in the main body of the paper, we specialized to a code subspace
of dimension d = 2κ with κ = poly(N ); here we will leave d general.



                                         – 54 –
1. Fidelity for typical pseudorandom unitaries. We start by proving that the
bound on the averaged fidelity in Theorem 2 also holds for typical Haar random uni-
taries and states, and subsequently prove this for pseudorandom unitaries and states.
To do so, we employ techniques from measure concentration. An introduction to the
theory of measure concentration, including numerous references, is given in Appendix
B of [31]. Here we only need the following lemma for measure concentration on the
unitary group.
Lemma 1 (Meckes (Corollary 17 in [91])). Let f : U (d)√→ R be K-Lipschitz in the
sense that |f (U1 ) − f (U2 )| ≤ K||U1 − U2 ||2 , with ||X||2 ≡ tr X † X. Then in the Haar
measure on U (d) we have the following concentration inequalities for any ϵ > 0:
                                                             ϵ2 d
                                                                 
                               Pr[f ≥ ⟨f ⟩ + ϵ] ≤ exp −             ,
                                                           12K 2
                                                             ϵ2 d
                                                                 
                               Pr[f ≤ ⟨f ⟩ − ϵ] ≤ exp −             ,                 (A.2)
                                                           12K 2
                                                             ϵ2 d
                                                                 
                           Pr[|f − ⟨f ⟩ | ≥ ϵ] ≤ 2 exp −            .
                                                           12K 2
      For the purposes of Theorem 3, we are interested in applying this to the function
F = F (U |ψ⟩ , Ub |ψ⟩) = | ⟨ψ|U † U
                                  b |ψ⟩ |2 , where we first consider Haar random U and |ψ⟩,
i.e., U ← µ and |ψ⟩ ← µ, and furthermore U     b is the guess that the algorithm AU outputs.
Thus, our task is to show that the function F obeys the requirements for Lemma 1 to
hold, such that fluctuations around the average are exponentially suppressed. That is,
we need to check that F is K-Lipschitz for some fixed K.
      Note that the algorithm’s output U   b depends on U . This dependence is complicated:
                             U
the quantum algorithm A , as a result of, e.g., intrinsic randomness in the outcome
of measurements during the learning process, generally outputs a U           b that is not a
deterministic function of U . In the following, we will start by considering instead a
deterministic algorithm, i.e., the algorithm is some function A(U ) that maps every
unitary U to some norm-preserving operator U       b.
      We then prove the following lemma:
Lemma 2. Let A(U ) denote any deterministic K-Lipschitz function that maps every
                                           b . Let |ψ⟩ and |φ⟩ be any two fixed states
unitary U to some norm-preserving operator U
in the Hilbert space H. Then the function F (U ) ≡ F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |φ⟩) is (2 + 2K)-
Lipschitz in U .

Proof. Our aim is to show that

                        |F (U1 ) − F (U2 )| ≤ (2 + 2K)||U1 − U2 ||2 .                 (A.3)



                                           – 55 –
To show (A.3), first, notice that we can rewrite
       F (U ) = F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |φ⟩) = tr A(U ) |φ⟩ ⟨φ| A(U )† U |ψ⟩ ⟨ψ| U †
                                                                             

              = tr (A(U )† U )† φ A(U )† U ψ
                                            
                                                                                               (A.4)
              = tr (A(U )† U )† ⊗ A(U )† U (φ ⊗ ψ)S .
                                                    

Here we used φ = |φ⟩ ⟨φ| and ψ = |ψ⟩ ⟨ψ|. In the third line we introduced a second
copy of the Hilbert space; S is the swap operator. For readability, in what follows, we
will abbreviate A(Ui ) = Ai . Then, using Hölder’s inequality,
                             h                                                    i
                                  †     †     †          †    †     †
    |F (U1 ) − F (U2 )| = tr (A1 U1 ) ⊗ A1 U1 − (A2 U2 ) ⊗ A2 U2 (φ ⊗ ψ)S
                                                                                       (A.5)
                        ≤ ||φ ⊗ ψ||1 ||S (A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†1 U1 − (A†2 U2 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 ||∞ .
Since φ ⊗ ψ is a state, its trace norm is 1. Now we can combine submultiplicativity of
the operator norm with the fact that S is unitary, such that
     ||S (A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†1 U1 −(A†2 U2 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 ||∞
                                                 

                               ≤ ||S||∞ || (A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†1 U1 − (A†2 U2 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 ||∞
                                                                                    
                                                                                         (A.6)
                                = ||(A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†1 U1 − (A†2 U2 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 ||∞ .
Recall that we want to show that this is upper bounded by some K ′ ||U1 −U2 ||2 . Rewrite
the last line as
||(A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†1 U1 − (A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 + (A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 − (A†2 U2 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 ||∞
   ≤ ||(A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†1 U1 − (A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 ||∞ + ||(A†1 U1 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 − (A†2 U2 )† ⊗ A†2 U2 ||∞
   = 2||A†1 U1 − A†2 U2 ||∞ .                                                                  (A.7)
In the second line we used the triangle inequality; in the third we used ||A ⊗ B|| =
||A|| ||B||, and for unitaries ||U ||∞ = 1, and we are we are working with exactly norm-
preserving operators U  b such that also ||U  b ||∞ = 1. We now again use the triangle
inequality and submultiplicativity of the operator norm to rewrite the final line as
        2||A†1 U1 − A†2 U2 ||∞ = 2||A†1 U1 − A†2 U1 + A†2 U1 − A†2 U2 ||∞
                                ≤ 2||A†1 − A†2 ||∞ ||U1 ||∞ + 2||A†2 ||∞ ||U1 − U2 ||∞
                                                                                               (A.8)
                                ≤ (2 + 2K)||U1 − U2 ||∞
                                ≤ (2 + 2K)||U1 − U2 ||2 .
In the third line we used that A(U ) is K-Lipschitz for some K, and finally we used
|| · ||∞ ≤ || · ||2 . This completes the proof that the function F (U ) ≡ F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |φ⟩)
is (2 + 2K)-Lipschitz:
                          |F (U1 ) − F (U2 )| ≤ (2 + 2K)||U1 − U2 ||2 .                        (A.9)



                                               – 56 –
    Then, by Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, we have the following measure concentration
                                   2          2
result: that for fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/(48(1+K) ) of Haar random unitaries,

                  F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |φ⟩) − avg [F (V |ψ⟩ , A(V ) |φ⟩)] < ϵ .                   (A.10)
                                            V ←µ


We now wish to extend this to include measure concentration over Haar random states.
To this end, we prove the following lemma.
Lemma 3. Let A(U ) denote any deterministic K-Lipschitz function that maps every
                                           b . For fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ2 d/(48(1+K)2 ) of
unitary U to some norm-preserving operator U
                                                      2
Haar random unitaries U ← µ and fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/192 of Haar random states
|ψ⟩ ← µ, we have

                 F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |ψ⟩) − avg [F (V |φ⟩ , A(V ) |φ⟩)] < 2ϵ .                   (A.11)
                                            V ←µ
                                           |φ⟩←µ


Proof. Consider first fixing some U and A(U ). Let V be a Haar random unitary and
|ψ0 ⟩ some basis state, such that V |ψ0 ⟩ is a Haar random state. We show that the
function

         F (V ) ≡ F (U V |ψ0 ⟩ , A(U )V |ψ0 ⟩) = F (V † A(U )† U V |ψ0 ⟩ , |ψ0 ⟩)             (A.12)

is 4-Lipschitz. Following the same methods as in the proof of Lemma 2, we find the
analogue of (A.7):

                 |F (V1 ) − F (V2 )| ≤ 2||V1† A(U )† U V1 − V2† A(U )† U V2 ||∞ .             (A.13)

Then, by the triangle inequality,

|F (V1 ) − F (V2 )| ≤ 2||V1† A(U )† U V1 − V2† A(U )† U V1 + V2† A(U )† U V1 − V2† A(U )† U V2 ||∞
                   ≤ 2||V1† − V2† ||∞ ||A(U )† U V1 ||∞ + 2||V2† A(U )† U ||∞ ||V1 − V2 ||∞
                   ≤ 4||V1 − V2 ||2 .                                                         (A.14)

Note that in the last line we used again that A(U ) is exactly norm-preserving, such
that ||A(U )† U Vi ||∞ = 1, as well as || · ||∞ ≤ || · ||2 .
                                              2
    By Lemma 1, for fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/192 of |ψ⟩ ≡ V |ψ0 ⟩ ← µ,

                  F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |ψ⟩) − avg [F (U |φ⟩ , A(U ) |φ⟩)] < ϵ .                   (A.15)
                                            |φ⟩←µ




                                             – 57 –
We now combine this with measure concentration for Haar random unitaries. Starting
from (A.10) for two (fixed) states |φ⟩, and then averaging over φ ← µ, we have for
                  2         2
fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/48(1+K) of U ← µ,

               avg [F (U |φ⟩ , A(U ) |φ⟩] − avg [F (V |φ⟩ , A(V ) |φ⟩)] < ϵ .        (A.16)
               |φ⟩←µ                           V ←µ
                                              |φ⟩←µ


Now add and subtract F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |ψ⟩). This gives

  F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |ψ⟩) − avg [F (V |φ⟩ , A(V ) |φ⟩)]
                          V ←µ
                         |φ⟩←µ
                                                                                     (A.17)
                       < ϵ + F (U |ψ⟩ , A(U ) |ψ⟩) − avg [F (U |φ⟩ , A(U ) |φ⟩)] .
                                                        |φ⟩←µ

                                                                                      2
Now we can use (A.15) to bound the right hand side to 2ϵ for fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/192
of |ψ⟩ ← µ. This concludes the proof of Lemma 3.


    To prove Theorem 3, it remains to extend the above results to (1) non-deterministic
functions A(U ), e.g., quantum algorithms AU , and (2) to pseudorandom unitaries and
states. We first briefly address point (1). We can run the proofs of Lemma 2 and
Lemma 3 analogously for U  bi ← AUi until we need a smoothness property of U bi . There,
instead of K-Lipschitz, we use the randomized K-Lipschitz property in Definition 6.
Furthermore, using the inequality

                  |avg F (U1 ) − avg F (U2 )| ≤ avg |F (U1 ) − F (U2 )| ,       (A.18)
                                          h                  i
we have that the function F (V ) = avg F (V |ψ⟩ , Vb |ψ⟩) is itself (2 + 2K)-Lipschitz.
                                    Vb ←AV
This allows us to extend our measure concentration results to this function F (V ) where
previously we proved them for F (U ) = F (U |ψ⟩ , U  b |ψ⟩).
                                                                          2         2
     Then we arrive at the following result: that for fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/(48(1+K) ) of
                                       2
U ← µ, and for fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/192 of |ψ⟩ ← µ (alternatively, we can think of
                  2          2           2
this as ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/192 − e−ϵ d/(48(1+K) ) fraction of U ← µ and |ψ⟩ ← µ), we have the
following concentration bound:
                                           "                         #
             h                 i                  h                i
         avg F (U |ψ⟩ , Ub |ψ⟩) − avg        avg F (V |φ⟩ , Vb |φ⟩) < 2ϵ .        (A.19)
       b ←AU
       U                             V ←µ    Vb ←AV
                                    |φ⟩←µ


    Finally, we address point (2) above, and show that to preserve indistinguishability,
the above result must also hold for pseudorandom unitaries and states. Intuitively, if the



                                             – 58 –
fluctuations around the Haar random averaged fidelity are exponentially suppressed,
but the fluctuations around the pseudorandom averaged fidelity are not, then one could
measure these fluctuations and thereby distinguish pseudorandom unitaries and states
from Haar random ones, breaking the pseudorandomness.
     We proceed to formally show this below.
Lemma 4. Let κ = poly(N ) be the security parameter. Let U be any pseudorandom
unitary (PRU) ensemble and let Ψ be any pseudorandom state (PRS) ensemble. Let
b be the output of the learning algorithm AU , which we assume to be (randomized)
U
K-Lipschitz, and where U ← U. Then the following concentration inequality holds, in
                                                                         2         2
the measure induced on U and Ψ, for any ϵ > 0, with probability ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/48(1+K) −
   2
e−ϵ d/192 − negl′ (N ) over U ← U and |ψ⟩ ← Ψ,
                                                   
         avg F U |ψ⟩ , U b |ψ⟩ − avg F V |φ⟩ , Vb |φ⟩ < 2ϵ + negl(N ) .
        b ←AU
        U                         V ←U
                                 |φ⟩←Ψ
                                                                                (A.20)
                               Vb ←AV

Proof. To prove Lemma 4, we first extend (A.19) to pseudorandom unitaries, and then
to pseudorandom states.
    First, let Ψ be any ensemble of states. For ease of notation, we write
                                        h                i
                            β := avg F (U |ψ⟩ , U  b |ψ⟩)                    (A.21)
                                  U ←µ
                                 |ψ⟩←Ψ
                                 b ←AU
                                 U

and                                      h                    i
                           β ′ := avg        F (U |ψ⟩ , U
                                                        b |ψ⟩) .               (A.22)
                                  U ←U
                                 |ψ⟩←Ψ
                                 b ←AU
                                 U

By Lemma 7 of [33], |β − β ′ | ≤ η(N ) where η is a negligible function.
    Assume towards contradiction that there exists a pseudorandom unitary ensemble
U, any distribution of states Ψ, and a positive polynomial p such that
        "                                          #
                          b |ψ⟩ − β ′ ≥ ϵ + η(N ) ≥ e−ϵ2 d/48(1+K)2 + 1 . (A.23)
                               
    Pr     avg F U |ψ⟩ , U
   U ←U   b ←AU
          U                                                              p(N )
  |ψ⟩←Ψ


If the above equation holds, then there is a state |ψ0 ⟩ such that this equation holds
with |ψ⟩ := |ψ0 ⟩:
       "                                           #
                          b |ψ0 ⟩ − β ′ ≥ ϵ + η(N ) ≥ e−ϵ2 d/48(1+K)2 + 1 . (A.24)
                                
    Pr    avg F U |ψ0 ⟩ , U
   U ←U b
         U ←AU                                                         p(N )



                                         – 59 –
We now construct an efficient algorithm Dist that uses oracle access to the pseudoran-
dom unitary U and also can run the learning algorithm AU .49 We show that if our
assumption (A.23) is true, then Dist can distinguish between U ← µ and U ← U, thus
breaking the pseudorandomness of U.
     The distinguisher Dist gets poly(N ) copies of |ψ0 ⟩, and is also handed β.50 Then
it proceeds as follows:

   1. Dist runs A and simulates the oracle for A: it receives each query from A, sends
      the query to its oracle U , and returns the response to A.

   2. Dist gives |ψ0 ⟩ to A and receives back U
                                              b |ψ0 ⟩. It also gives |ψ0 ⟩ to its oracle U
      and gets back U |ψ0 ⟩.

   3. Dist repeats this poly(N ) times and then uses a quantum algorithm (e.g., [92]) to
      efficiently estimate β ′′ := F (U |ψ0 ⟩ , U
                                                b |ψ0 ⟩) up to some additive error ϵ̂ > 0, i.e.,
         ′′     ′′
      |βest − β | ≤ ϵ̂.
          ′′
   4. If βest − β ≥ ϵ̃, where ϵ̃ > ϵ̂, then Dist outputs 1.

    Note that Dist runs in poly(N )-time since it can efficiently query the oracle, and
furthermore the quantum algorithm for fidelity estimation is efficient.51
    We now show that Dist distinguishes between U ← µ and U ← U. For Haar
random U ← µ as the oracle,
                               ′′
          Pr [Dist = 1] = Pr [βest − β ≥ ϵ̃] = Pr [β ′′ − β ≥ ϵ̃ − (βest
                                                                     ′′
                                                                         − β ′′ )]
         U ←µ

                           ≤ Pr [β ′′ − β ≥ ϵ̃ − ϵ̂]                                             (A.25)
                               −(ϵ̃−ϵ̂)2 d/48(1+K)2
                           ≤e                         ,
                     ′′
where we used −ϵ̂ ≤ βest − β ′′ ≤ ϵ̂ in the second line, and (A.10) (concentration in the
Haar measure) for ϵ = ϵ̃ − ϵ̂ > 0 in the last line.
  49
     Note that the distinguisher can depend on N , as ours does here, since e.g. |ψ0 ⟩ depends on N .
  50
     The careful reader might worry that handing the distinguisher (multiple copies of) any state in
H, or β, breaks the computational boundedness of the algorithm. Note, however, that although the
algorithms we consider are limited to a polynomial number of queries in log dim H, each query can be
for any state in H that the algorithm a) can prepare or b) has been given as “advice”. This advice can
also include quantities like β. Note that the learning algorithm we consider in, e.g, Theorem 3 gets
only one copy of the physical state |ψ⟩; the distinguisher that we describe here is a different algorithm
and can receive multiple copies as advice.
  51
     For example, the quantum algorithm of [92] runs in poly(1/ϵ̂)-time.




                                                 – 60 –
    For pseudorandom U ← U as the oracle,
                        ′′
   Pr [Dist = 1] = Pr [βest − β ≥ ϵ̃] = Pr [β ′′ − β ′ ≥ ϵ̃ − (βest
                                                                ′′
                                                                    − β ′′ ) − (β ′ − β)]
  U ←U

                   ≥ Pr [β ′′ − β ′ ≥ ϵ̃ + ϵ̂ + η(N )]                                      (A.26)
                              2          2      1
                   ≥ e−(ϵ̃+ϵ̂) d/48(1+K) +          ,
                                              p(N )

where we used −η(N ) ≤ β − β ′ ≤ η(N ) in the third line, and our assumption (A.23)
in the last line for ϵ = ϵ̃ + ϵ̂.
    Therefore,
                                            1         (ϵ̃+ϵ̂)2 d        (ϵ̃−ϵ̂)2 d
                                                   −                 −
          Pr [Dist = 1] − Pr [Dist = 1] ≥       +e   48(1+K)    2
                                                                  −e   48(1+K)    2
                                                                                    .       (A.27)
         U ←U            U ←µ             p(N )
This shows that Dist distinguishes between U ← µ and U ← U. Since Dist runs in
poly(N ) time, this contradicts the pseudorandomness of U (Definition 3). Thus based
                                                                   2        2
on the pseudorandomness of U, we must have that for fraction ≤ e−ϵ d/48(1+K) + η ′ (N )
of U ← U
                                                   
           avg F U |ψ⟩ , Ub |ψ⟩ − avg F V |φ⟩ , Vb |φ⟩ ≥ ϵ + η(N ) ,          (A.28)
          b ←AU
          U                               V ←U
                                         |φ⟩←Ψ
                                        Vb ←AV

where η ′ (N ) is negligible. In particular, this holds when |ψ⟩ ← Ψ is Haar random.
    Thus, we have proven a measure concentration result for fluctuations around the av-
erage fidelity where we average over pseudorandom unitaries (and Haar random states).
An analogous proof holds for fluctuations around the average fidelity where we average
over pseudorandom states (and any distribution of unitaries D; in particular, it holds
for Haar random unitaries U ← µ). It requires Lemma 8 in [33]. This would result
                                                                         2
in the following measure concentration result: that for fraction ≤ e−ϵ d/192 + η̃ ′ (N ) of
|ψ⟩ ← Ψ,
                                         h               i
           avg F U |ψ⟩ , U |ψ⟩ − avg F V |φ⟩ , V |φ⟩ ≥ ϵ + η̃(N ) ,
                           b                            b                           (A.29)
         b ←AU
         U                               V ←U
                                        |φ⟩←Ψ
                                       Vb ←AV

where we explicated that the negligible functions need not be the same as in (A.28).
Combining (A.28) and (A.29) concludes the proof of Lemma 4.

    We will now use Lemma 4 to prove the first part of Theorem 3. Consider any
constant ϵ > 0. Consider any sufficiently large value of N ∈ N so that Theorem 2
from [33] holds. Let U ← U and |ψ⟩ ← Ψ denote the pseudorandom unitary and



                                                 – 61 –
state. Let U  b denote the operator that AU produces. To connect to the learning
                                                                 b |ψ⟩ ← AU (|ψ⟩).
result (Theorem 2), we average over the output of the algorithm, U
We abbreviate this by U  b ← AU . By Lemma 4, we have that with probability ≥
        2        2     2
1 − e−ϵ d/48(1+K) − e−ϵ d/192 − negl′ (N ),
            h                i          h          i
       avg F U |ψ⟩ , Ub |ψ⟩ − avg F V |φ⟩ , Vb |φ⟩ < 2ϵ + negl(N ) .
      b ←AU
      U                           V ←U                                    (A.30)
                                   |φ⟩←Ψ
                                  Vb ←AV

We call (U, |ψ⟩) typical if the above equation holds. The complexity of learning result
(Theorem 2) gives us an upper bound on the average fidelity. Thus we have that for
any typical (U, |ψ⟩),
                         h               i
                   avg F U |ψ⟩ , U   b |ψ⟩ ≤ 1 − α + 2ϵ + negl(N ) .            (A.31)
                  b ←AU
                  U

This shows the first part of the theorem (Equation (3.5)).

Haar random unitaries and states.    Note that we obtain a stronger result for Haar
                                                                2         2     2
random unitaries and states: namely, that for fraction ≥ 1 − e−ϵ d/48(1+K) − e−ϵ d/192
of U ← µ and |ψ⟩ ← µ,
                            h              i
                       avg F U |ψ⟩ , U b |ψ⟩ ≤ 1 − α + 2ϵ .                   (A.32)
                          b ←AU
                          U

Note that for d = 2κ with κ = poly(N ), this means that the above bound is violated
for only a fraction that is doubly-exponentially suppressed in N .

2. Distinguishing operator. We now show the second part of the theorem. The
relationship between fidelity and distinguishing measurements is a known result; for
any finite dimensional Hilbert space, this is given in Appendix B in [33]. Thus, for any
typical (U, |ψ⟩), there exists an operator Q (for a given U
                                                          b ) for which

                avg tr(QU  b † ) − tr(QU ψU † ) ≥ 2α − 4ϵ − negl(N ) .
                        b ψU                                                      (A.33)
               b ←AU
               U

This concludes the proof of Theorem 3.



B     Proof of Corollary 3.1
In this appendix, we prove Corollary 3.1, the existence of a semiclassical distinguishing
operator. We repeat Corollary 3.1 here for convenience:



                                           – 62 –
Corollary 3.1 (Distinguishing Operator at N → ∞). Let {UN |ψN ⟩}N and {U     bN |ψN ⟩}N
be two sequences of states that are represented on the code, namely there exist |ξ⟩ and
 ˆ such that UN |ψN ⟩ = VN |ξ⟩ and U
|ξ⟩                                                     ˆ Furthermore, assume that
                                        bN |ψN ⟩ = VN |ξ⟩.
{UN |ψN ⟩}N and {UbN |ψN ⟩}N satisfy the assumptions stated above, then both 1. and 2.
                                                ˆ In particular, by taking the constant
in Theorem 3 also hold for the states |ξ⟩ and |ξ⟩.
                                 ˆ the existence of an operator Q ∈ B(H) such that
ϵ to be < α/2, we have for any |ξ⟩
                                       ˆ − tr(Qξ) ≥ O(1) .
                               avg tr(Qξ)
                                ξb

Proof. By the assumptions on the sequences {UN |ψN ⟩}N and {U       bN |ψN ⟩}N , for every
sufficiently large N , UN |ψN ⟩ and U
                                    bN |ψN ⟩ satisfy 1. and 2. in Theorem 3.
     The result (A.31) by definition guarantees that

                         avg ⟨ξ|VN† VN |ξ⟩
                                        ˆ ≤ 1 − α − negl(N ).                       (B.1)
                          ξ̂

Taking the limit of both sides and using the definition of an asymptotically isometric
                                                                ˆ obey the inequality
code in Assumption 2, we see that the two bulk states |ξ⟩ and |ξ⟩
as well. Note that to commute the average over ξˆ with the N → ∞ limit we had to
use the dominated convergence theorem.
    By the Fuchs–van de Graaf inequality, the overlap of the two states ⟨ξ|ξ⟩ ˆ upper
and lower bounds their one-norm distance:
                                     1
                         q                        q
                                ˆ           ˆ
                     1 − F (ξ, ξ) ≤ ||ξ − ξ||1 ≤ 1 − F (ξ, ξ) ˆ .                (B.2)
                                     2
When ξ is a pure state, the lower bound can be strengthened:
                               1       ˆ 1 ≥ 1 − F (ξ, ξ)
                                                       ˆ .
                                 ||ξ − ξ||                                          (B.3)
                               2
Averaging this inequality over ξˆ and using (B.1), we see that
                                                    ˆ 1 ≥ 2α.
                                          avg ||ξ − ξ||                             (B.4)
                                           ξ̂

The one-norm distance between two states on a general algebra B(H) may be written
as
                          ˆ 1=
                    ||ξ − ξ||       sup                    ˆ
                                            | tr(aξ) − tr(aξ)|.            (B.5)
                                          a∈B(H):||a||∞ ≤1

where the operators in the supremum are restricted to be self-adjoint. Combining
(B.5) and (B.4), we see that there exists some operator Q ∈ B(H), depending on U
                                                                               b
              ˆ such that
and therefore ξ,
                                       b − tr(Qξ) ≥ 2α .
                               avg tr(Qξ)                                           (B.6)
                                     ξb




                                                 – 63 –
In particular, we get that there exists an operator whose expectation values for ξˆ and
ξ must differ by a constant. This concludes the proof of Corollary 3.1.


References
 [1] R. Penrose, Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities, Phys. Rev. Lett. 14
     (1965) 57–59.
 [2] S. W. Hawking, Singularities in the universe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17 (Aug, 1966) 444–445.
 [3] S. W. Hawking and R. Penrose, The Singularities of gravitational collapse and
     cosmology, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 314 (1970) 529–548.
 [4] R. Penrose, Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities, Phys. Rev. Lett. 14
     (Jan, 1965) 57–59.
 [5] S. W. Hawking, Gravitational radiation from colliding black holes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 26
     (1971) 1344–1346.
 [6] D. Marolf and J. Polchinski, Gauge/Gravity Duality and the Black Hole Interior, Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 171301, [arXiv:1307.4706].
 [7] R. Gregory and R. Laflamme, The Instability of Charged Black Strings and p-Branes,
     Nucl. Phys. B 428 (1994) 399–434, [hep-th/9404071].
 [8] L. Lehner and F. Pretorius, Black Strings, Low Viscosity Fluids, and Violation of
     Cosmic Censorship, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010) 101102, [arXiv:1006.5960].
 [9] R. Gregory, The Gregory–Laflamme instability, pp. 29–43. Cambridge University Press,
     2012. arXiv:1107.5821.
[10] G. T. Horowitz, J. E. Santos, and B. Way, Evidence for an Electrifying Violation of
     Cosmic Censorship, Class. Quant. Grav. 33 (2016), no. 19 195007,
     [arXiv:1604.06465].
[11] T. Crisford and J. E. Santos, Violating the Weak Cosmic Censorship Conjecture in
     Four-Dimensional Anti–de Sitter Space, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2017), no. 18 181101,
     [arXiv:1702.05490].
[12] T. Crisford, G. T. Horowitz, and J. E. Santos, Testing the Weak Gravity – Cosmic
     Censorship Connection, Phys. Rev. D 97 (2018), no. 6 066005, [arXiv:1709.07880].
[13] G. T. Horowitz and J. E. Santos, Further Evidence for the Weak Gravity – Cosmic
     Censorship Connection, JHEP 06 (2019) 122, [arXiv:1901.11096].
[14] Å. Folkestad, Penrose Inequality as a Constraint on the Low Energy Limit of Quantum
     Gravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130 (2023), no. 12 121501, [arXiv:2209.00013].




                                           – 64 –
[15] F. C. Eperon, B. Ganchev, and J. E. Santos, Plausible scenario for a generic violation
     of the weak cosmic censorship conjecture in asymptotically flat four dimensions, Phys.
     Rev. D 101 (2020), no. 4 041502, [arXiv:1906.11257].
[16] J. Bardeen, Non-singular general relativistic gravitational collapse, in Proceedings of
     the 5th International Conference on Gravitation and the Theory of Relativity, p. 87,
     Sept., 1968.
[17] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis, and C. Vafa, The string landscape, black holes
     and gravity as the weakest force, JHEP 06 (2007) 060, [hep-th/0601001].
[18] N. Engelhardt and G. T. Horowitz, Holographic argument for the Penrose inequality in
     AdS spacetimes, Phys. Rev. D 99 (2019), no. 12 126009, [arXiv:1903.00555].
[19] K. S. Thorne, Nonspherical gravitational collapse: a short review, pp. 231–258. W.H.
     Freeman & Co., 1972.
[20] S. L. Shapiro and S. A. Teukolsky, Formation of naked singularities: The violation of
     cosmic censorship, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991) 994–997.
[21] M. W. Choptuik and F. Pretorius, Ultra Relativistic Particle Collisions, Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 104 (2010) 111101, [arXiv:0908.1780].
[22] P. M. Chesler and W. van der Schee, Early thermalization, hydrodynamics and energy
     loss in AdS/CFT, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 24 (2015), no. 10 1530011,
     [arXiv:1501.04952].
[23] A. Almheiri, D. Marolf, J. Polchinski, and J. Sully, Black Holes: Complementarity or
     Firewalls?, JHEP 02 (2013) 062, [arXiv:1207.3123].
[24] A. Almheiri, D. Marolf, J. Polchinski, D. Stanford, and J. Sully, An Apologia for
     Firewalls, JHEP 09 (2013) 018, [arXiv:1304.6483].
[25] R. Emparan, Predictivity lost, predictivity regained: a Miltonian cosmic censorship
     conjecture, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 29 (2020), no. 14 2043021, [arXiv:2005.07389].
[26] A. C. Wall, Maximin Surfaces, and the Strong Subadditivity of the Covariant
     Holographic Entanglement Entropy, Class.Quant.Grav. 31 (2014), no. 22 225007,
     [arXiv:1211.3494].
[27] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, No Simple Dual to the Causal Holographic
     Information?, JHEP 04 (2017) 134, [arXiv:1702.01748].
[28] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, Coarse Graining Holographic Black Holes, JHEP 05
     (2019) 160, [arXiv:1806.01281].
[29] N. Engelhardt, G. Penington, and A. Shahbazi-Moghaddam, Finding pythons in
     unexpected places, Class. Quant. Grav. 39 (2022), no. 9 094002, [arXiv:2105.09316].




                                            – 65 –
[30] N. Engelhardt, G. Penington, and A. Shahbazi-Moghaddam, A world without pythons
     would be so simple, Class. Quant. Grav. 38 (2021), no. 23 234001, [arXiv:2102.07774].
[31] C. Akers, N. Engelhardt, D. Harlow, G. Penington, and S. Vardhan, The black hole
     interior from non-isometric codes and complexity, arXiv:2207.06536.
[32] A. Bouland, B. Fefferman, and U. Vazirani, Computational pseudorandomness, the
     wormhole growth paradox, and constraints on the AdS/CFT duality,
     arXiv:1910.14646.
[33] L. Yang and N. Engelhardt, The complexity of learning (pseudo)random dynamics of
     black holes and other chaotic systems, arXiv:2302.11013.
[34] Z. Ji, Y.-K. Liu, and F. Song, Pseudorandom quantum states, in Advances in
     Cryptology – CRYPTO 2018 (H. Shacham and A. Boldyreva, eds.), (Cham),
     pp. 126–152, Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[35] P. Hayden and J. Preskill, Black holes as mirrors: quantum information in random
     subsystems, JHEP 09 (2007) 120, [arXiv:0708.4025].
[36] I. H. Kim and J. Preskill, Complementarity and the unitarity of the black hole
     S-matrix, JHEP 02 (2023) 233, [arXiv:2212.00194].
[37] S. H. Shenker and D. Stanford, Black holes and the butterfly effect, JHEP 03 (2014)
     067, [arXiv:1306.0622].
[38] D. A. Roberts, D. Stanford, and L. Susskind, Localized shocks, JHEP 03 (2015) 051,
     [arXiv:1409.8180].
[39] J. Maldacena, S. H. Shenker, and D. Stanford, A bound on chaos, JHEP 08 (2016)
     106, [arXiv:1503.01409].
[40] J. S. Cotler, G. Gur-Ari, M. Hanada, J. Polchinski, P. Saad, S. H. Shenker,
     D. Stanford, A. Streicher, and M. Tezuka, Black Holes and Random Matrices, JHEP
     05 (2017) 118, [arXiv:1611.04650]. [Erratum: JHEP 09, 002 (2018)].
[41] N. Engelhardt and Å. Folkestad, Holography Abhors Visible Trapped Surfaces, JHEP
     07 (2021) 066, [arXiv:2012.11445].
[42] A. R. Brown, H. Gharibyan, G. Penington, and L. Susskind, The Python’s Lunch:
     geometric obstructions to decoding Hawking radiation, JHEP 08 (2020) 121,
     [arXiv:1912.00228].
[43] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, Quantum Extremal Surfaces: Holographic Entanglement
     Entropy beyond the Classical Regime, JHEP 01 (2015) 073, [arXiv:1408.3203].
[44] R. Bousso, Z. Fisher, S. Leichenauer, and A. C. Wall, Quantum focusing conjecture,
     Phys. Rev. D93 (2016), no. 6 064044, [arXiv:1506.02669].




                                          – 66 –
[45] A. Almheiri, R. Mahajan, and J. Maldacena, Islands outside the horizon,
     arXiv:1910.11077.
[46] R. Bousso and G. Penington, Islands Far Outside the Horizon, arXiv:2312.03078.
[47] V. A. Belinsky, I. M. Khalatnikov, and E. M. Lifshitz, Oscillatory approach to a
     singular point in the relativistic cosmology, Adv. Phys. 19 (1970) 525–573.
[48] V. A. Belinsky and I. M. Khalatnikov, General Solution of the Gravitational Equations
     with a Physical Singularity, Sov.Phys.JETP 30 (1970) 1174.
[49] E. Shaghoulian and H. Wang, Timelike BKL singularities and chaos in AdS/CFT,
     Class. Quant. Grav. 33 (2016), no. 12 125020, [arXiv:1601.02599].
[50] T. Faulkner and M. Li, Asymptotically isometric codes for holography,
     arXiv:2211.12439.
[51] S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, Subalgebra-subregion duality: emergence of space and time
     in holography, arXiv:2212.13266.
[52] N. Engelhardt, Å. Folkestad, A. Levine, E. Verheijden, and L. Yang, Spoofing
     entanglement in holography, arXiv:2407.14589.
[53] R. Bousso, Z. Fisher, S. Leichenauer, and A. C. Wall, Quantum focusing conjecture,
     Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016), no. 6 064044, [arXiv:1506.02669].
[54] A. C. Wall, A Proof of the generalized second law for rapidly-evolving Rindler horizons,
     Phys.Rev. D82 (2010) 124019, [arXiv:1007.1493].
[55] A. Shahbazi-Moghaddam, Restricted Quantum Focusing, arXiv:2212.03881.
[56] N. Engelhardt, G. Penington, and A. Shahbazi-Moghaddam, Twice Upon a Time:
     Timelike-Separated Quantum Extremal Surfaces, JHEP 01 (2024) 033,
     [arXiv:2308.16226].
[57] C. Akers, N. Engelhardt, G. Penington, and M. Usatyuk, Quantum Maximin Surfaces,
     JHEP 08 (2020) 140, [arXiv:1912.02799].
[58] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, Decoding the Apparent Horizon: Coarse-Grained
     Holographic Entropy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018), no. 21 211301, [arXiv:1706.02038].
[59] A. Hamilton, D. N. Kabat, G. Lifschytz, and D. A. Lowe, Local bulk operators in
     AdS/CFT: A Boundary view of horizons and locality, Phys.Rev. D73 (2006) 086003,
     [hep-th/0506118].
[60] A. Hamilton, D. N. Kabat, G. Lifschytz, and D. A. Lowe, Holographic representation of
     local bulk operators, Phys.Rev. D74 (2006) 066009, [hep-th/0606141].
[61] A. Hamilton, D. N. Kabat, G. Lifschytz, and D. A. Lowe, Local bulk operators in
     AdS/CFT: A Holographic description of the black hole interior, Phys. Rev. D75 (2007)
     106001, [hep-th/0612053]. [Erratum: Phys. Rev.D75,129902(2007)].




                                           – 67 –
[62] N. Engelhardt and H. Liu, Algebraic ER=EPR and Complexity Transfer,
     arXiv:2311.04281.
[63] D. Harlow and P. Hayden, Quantum Computation vs. Firewalls, JHEP 1306 (2013)
     085, [arXiv:1301.4504].
[64] I. Kim, E. Tang, and J. Preskill, The ghost in the radiation: Robust encodings of the
     black hole interior, JHEP 06 (2020) 031, [arXiv:2003.05451].
[65] H.-Y. Huang, S. Chen, and J. Preskill, Learning to Predict Arbitrary Quantum
     Processes, PRX Quantum 4 (2023), no. 4 040337, [arXiv:2210.14894].
[66] D. Marolf, Microcanonical Path Integrals and the Holography of small Black Hole
     Interiors, JHEP 09 (2018) 114, [arXiv:1808.00394].
[67] D. A. Roberts and B. Yoshida, Chaos and complexity by design, JHEP 04 (2017) 121,
     [arXiv:1610.04903].
[68] R. Gregory and R. Laflamme, Black strings and p-branes are unstable, Phys. Rev. Lett.
     70 (1993) 2837–2840, [hep-th/9301052].
[69] R. P. Geroch, Local characterization of singularities in general relativity, J. Math.
     Phys. 9 (1968) 450–465.
[70] Y. B. Zeldovich, A New Type of Radioactive Decay: Gravitational Annihilation of
     Baryons, Phys. Lett. A 59 (1976) 254.
[71] L. F. Abbott and M. B. Wise, Wormholes and Global Symmetries, Nucl. Phys. B 325
     (1989) 687–704.
[72] R. Kallosh, A. D. Linde, D. A. Linde, and L. Susskind, Gravity and global symmetries,
     Phys. Rev. D 52 (1995) 912–935, [hep-th/9502069].
[73] M. W. Choptuik, Universality and scaling in gravitational collapse of a massless scalar
     field, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993) 9–12.
[74] D. Christodoulou, Examples of naked singularity formation in the gravitational collapse
     of a scalar field, Annals Math. 140 (1994) 607–653.
[75] J. Santos, Connecting the weak gravity conjecture to the weak cosmic censorship, in
     Strings 2018, (Okinawa, Japan), June, 2018.
[76] R. P. Geroch and G. T. Horowitz, Global structure of spacetimes, in General Relativity:
     An Einstein Centenary Survey, pp. 212–293. Cambridge University Press, 1979.
[77] E. Giorgi, S. Klainerman, and J. Szeftel, Wave equations estimates and the nonlinear
     stability of slowly rotating kerr black holes, 2022.
[78] F. Haake, Quantum signatures of chaos. Springer, 1991.
[79] D. N. Page, Expected entropy of a subsystem, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993) 1291–1294,
     [http://arXiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9305007].




                                            – 68 –
[80] J. Choi et al., Preparing random states and benchmarking with many-body quantum
     chaos, Nature 613 (2023), no. 7944 468–473, [arXiv:2103.03535].
[81] W. W. Ho and S. Choi, Exact emergent quantum state designs from quantum chaotic
     dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128 (2022) 060601, [arXiv:2109.07491].
[82] R. Bousso, V. Chandrasekaran, and A. Shahbazi-Moghaddam, From black hole entropy
     to energy-minimizing states in QFT, Phys. Rev. D 101 (2020), no. 4 046001,
     [arXiv:1906.05299].
[83] N. Engelhardt and S. Fischetti, Losing the IR: a Holographic Framework for Area
     Theorems, Class. Quant. Grav. 36 (2019), no. 3 035008, [arXiv:1805.08891].
[84] A. M. Kubicki, A. May, and D. Pérez-Garcia, Constraints on physical computers in
     holographic spacetimes, SciPost Phys. 16 (2024) 024, [arXiv:2304.09900].
[85] I. Bena, S. Giusto, E. J. Martinec, R. Russo, M. Shigemori, D. Turton, and N. P.
     Warner, Smooth horizonless geometries deep inside the black-hole regime, Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 117 (2016), no. 20 201601, [arXiv:1607.03908].
[86] J. Cotler and A. Strominger, The Universe as a Quantum Encoder, arXiv:2201.11658.
[87] J. Cotler and K. Jensen, Isometric Evolution in de Sitter Quantum Gravity, Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 131 (2023), no. 21 211601, [arXiv:2302.06603].
[88] P. Ananth, A. Gulati, F. Kaleoglu, and Y.-T. Lin, “Pseudorandom Isometries.”
     Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/1741. https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/1741.
[89] S. Lloyd, Ultimate physical limits to computation, Nature 406 (2000), no. 6799
     1047–1054.
[90] G. Katoch, J. Ren, and S. R. Roy, Quantum complexity and bulk timelike singularities,
     JHEP 12 (2023) 085, [arXiv:2303.02752].
[91] E. Meckes and M. Meckes, Spectral measures of powers of random matrices, Electronic
     Communications in Probability 18 (jan, 2013).
[92] Q. Wang, Z. Zhang, K. Chen, J. Guan, W. Fang, J. Liu, and M. Ying, Quantum
     Algorithm for Fidelity Estimation, IEEE Trans. Info. Theor. 69 (2023), no. 1 273–282,
     [arXiv:2103.09076].




                                          – 69 –
