                                          Crossed products and quantum reference frames:
                                         on the observer-dependence of gravitational entropy

                                            Julian De Vuyst1,a , Stefan Eccles1,b , Philipp A. Höhn,1,c and Josh Kirklin1,2,d

                                                                            1
                                                                             Qubits and Spacetime Unit,
                                                       Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology (沖縄科学技術大学院大学),
arXiv:2412.15502v3 [hep-th] 8 Jul 2025




                                                       1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Kunigami-gun, Okinawa, Japan 904-0495

                                                                    2
                                                                    Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics,
                                                            31 Caroline Street North, Waterloo, ON, N2L 2Y5, Canada

                                                                             a
                                                                                julian.devuyst@oist.jp
                                                                                b
                                                                                  stefan.eccles@oist.jp
                                                                                c
                                                                                  philipp.hoehn@oist.jp
                                                                                   d
                                                                                     jkirklin@pitp.ca



                                                                                      Abstract
                                         A significant step towards a rigorous understanding of perturbative gravitational entropy was
                                         recently achieved by a series of works showing that a proper accounting of gauge invariance and
                                         observer degrees of freedom converts the Type III algebra of QFT observables in a gravitational
                                         subregion to a Type II crossed product, whose entropy reduces to the generalised entropy formula
                                         in a semiclassical limit. The observers thus used are also known as quantum reference frames
                                         (QRFs); as noted in our companion work [1], using different QRFs result in different algebras,
                                         and hence different entropies – so gravitational entropy is observer-dependent. Here, we provide
                                         an in-depth analysis of this phenomenon, with full derivations of many new results. Using the
                                         perspective-neutral QRF formalism, we extend previous constructions to allow for arbitrarily many
                                         observers, each carrying a clock with possibly degenerate energy spectra. We consider a semiclassical
                                         regime characterized by clocks whose energy fluctuations dominate over the fluctuations of the
                                         energy of the QFT. Unlike previous works, we allow the clocks and fields to be arbitrarily entangled.
                                         At leading order the von Neumann entropy still reduces to the generalised entropy, but linear
                                         corrections are typically non-vanishing and quantify the degree of entanglement between the clocks
                                         and fields. We also describe an ‘antisemiclassical’ regime as the opposite of the semiclassical one,
                                         with suppressed fluctuations of the clock energy; in this regime, we show how the clock may simply
                                         be ‘partially traced’ out when evaluating the entropy. Four explicit examples of observer-dependent
                                         entropy are then given, involving a gravitational interferometer, degenerate clock superselection,
                                         a semiclassical approximation applying to some clocks but not others, and differences between
                                         monotonic and periodic clocks.
                                         Contents

1 Introduction                                                                  3

2 Quantum clocks as quantum reference frames                                    7
  2.1   Modelling clocks with covariant POVMs                                   8
  2.2   Constraints, relational observable algebras and crossed products       10
  2.3 The physical Hilbert space                                               12
  2.4   Physical representation of the algebra                                 14
  2.5 “Jumping into a clock frame”: the Page-Wootters formalism                15
        2.5.1   Relational Schrödinger picture                                 16
        2.5.2   Observable reduction                                           18
  2.6   QRF transformations: changing to a different clock                     19
  2.7   Subsystem relativity                                                   21
  2.8   Kinematical vs. physical von Neumanness                                24

3 Realisation in perturbative quantum gravity: PW = CLPW                       25
  3.1   Subregions and constraints in perturbative quantum gravity             25
  3.2   PW = CLPW                                                              29
        3.2.1   Map to coinvariant representation is Page-Wootters reduction   30
        3.2.2   Reduction of observable algebras                               32

4 Subregion density operators with non-degenerate clocks                       33
  4.1 Trace on the observable algebra                                          35
  4.2   Density operator                                                       37
  4.3   Partial trace over a clock                                             38
  4.4   Comparison with previous work                                          39
  4.5 The need for a complementary frame                                       40

5 Subregion density operators with degenerate clocks                           41
  5.1   Degenerate quantum clocks as QRFs                                      41
        5.1.1   Covariant POVMs for degenerate clocks                          41
        5.1.2   Decomposition of Hilbert spaces and observable algebras        42
        5.1.3   Operational superselection                                     43
        5.1.4   Page-Wootters formalism for degenerate clocks                  45
        5.1.5   Changing degenerate clocks                                     45
        5.1.6   Subsystem relativity for degenerate clocks                     46
  5.2   Density operators                                                      47
        5.2.1   No superselection                                              47
        5.2.2   Superselection for all clocks                                  48
        5.2.3   Fixing the sector for one clock                                50



                                                  1
6 Semiclassical regime                                                          50
  6.1   Shannon entropy contribution from energy of complementary clocks        53
  6.2   Generalised entropy                                                     54
  6.3   Special case: separable QFT and frames                                  55
  6.4   Linear order correction and entanglement                                57
  6.5   Comparison with previous work                                           59

7 Antisemiclassical regime                                                      60

8 Observer-dependence of gravitational entropy                                  63
  8.1   Case study: gravitational interferometer                                63
  8.2   Degenerate clocks                                                       68
  8.3   Semiclassical vs. non-semiclassical clocks                              70
  8.4   Periodic vs. monotonic clocks                                           70

9 Conclusion                                                                    72

  Acknowledgements                                                              74

A Additional derivations concerning non-ideal clocks                            74
  A.1 Fourier transform for non-ideal clocks                                    74
  A.2 Algebra of gauge-invariant clock-system observables and type conversion   74
  A.3 Bounded physical operators from bounded kinematical ones                  76
  A.4 Reduced Hilbert space decomposition for non-ideal clocks                  77

B Constraint implementation via the T -map                                      78

C Details of derivation of density operator                                     78

D Details of semiclassical approximations                                       83
  D.1 Linear corrections                                                        85

E Comparing density operators to prior work                                     87

F Details of the gravitational interferometer example                           92

G Linear expansion of the symmetric BCH-formula                                 95

  References                                                                    95




                                               2
1     Introduction
    Geometry and information are deeply intertwined. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the
generalised entropy formula, which says that the entropy of a gravitational subregion is equal to
4GN +Sinside , where A is the area of the boundary of the subregion, GN is Newton’s constant, and Sinside
  A

is the entropy of any degrees of freedom contained inside the subregion. Since its thermodynamical
conceptions [2, 3], this formula has been a guiding principle in quantum gravity (see [4–9] for a very
small selection of results it has inspired). But it is misleadingly simple, for two reasons:
    • Sinside is not well-defined, because the UV modes of the fields inside of the subregion contribute
      infinitely to it. More precisely, the von Neumann algebra of field operators with support in a
      subregion is Type III1 , and thus has no well-defined von Neumann entropy functional [10–12].
      One may impose a UV cutoff to convert this algebra to something of Type I, which has well-
      defined von Neumann entropies. But a simple UV cutoff would ultimately be incompatible with
      general covariance in a full theory of gravity, and the UV cutoff cannot be removed without
      Sinside diverging. On the other hand, it was shown in [13–16] that a renormalisation of GN
      would allow the generalised entropy itself to be UV finite – the divergent piece of the Sinside
      term would be canceled by a similar divergence in the area term. This strongly indicates that
      the generalised entropy can be rigorously formulated without imposing a UV cutoff. But the
      underlying mechanism dictating how the appropriate renormalisation would be done has remained
      unclear.
    • Perhaps more fundamentally, a proper definition of the physical subsystem associated with a
      gravitational subregion must take into account diffeomorphism invariance. Indeed, if one is not
      careful about this, diffeomorphisms could move degrees of freedom in and out of the subregion,
      which would be incompatible with the notion of a definite physical subsystem comprised of such
      degrees of freedom. The generalised entropy formula must ultimately be interpreted as giving the
      entropy of such a subsystem – but much of the time it is employed without being very precise
      about this subtlety.
Resolving these issues is crucial not only for making sense of entropy in gravitational systems, but also
for understanding the fundamental structure of spacetime in a quantum context. At first glance, the
two problems seem to be more or less independent, but recent progress has shown that they are in
fact tightly linked together by the notion of quantum reference frames (QRFs), which simultaneously
regularise the entropy and account for diffeomorphism invariance. Let us give a brief account of how
this came about.
   First, in [17, 18], it was shown how an effective Type III1 algebra emerges from the large N limit of
the set of single trace operators acting on one of two copies of a holographic CFT in a thermofield
double state; this was interpreted as the algebra of effective field theory operators with support on one
side of the bulk dual black hole. Then, [19] demonstrated that one may consistently also include the
CFT Hamiltonian in the set of operators, and that doing so modifies the emergent algebra to be Type
II∞ . The bulk interpretation of this construction is that one is taking the so-called crossed product
of the field theory algebra by the action of a Killing boost preserving the black hole horizon. This
boost corresponds to the ‘modular flow’ of the bulk vacuum state, which is what is responsible for the
type conversion [12, 20]. Unlike Type III algebras, Type II algebras do have a well-defined entropy
functional, at least up to a state-independent constant.
   Next, it was explained in [21] how this construction extends beyond the holographic context; in
particular, that paper considered a system consisting of an observer carrying a clock inside of a static
patch of de Sitter spacetime. The algebra of operators which act on the clock and the fields in the



                                                   3
static patch, and which are invariant under the global de Sitter time evolution (which is a gravitational
gauge symmetry) was shown to be given by the crossed product of the Type III1 static patch field
algebra with respect to the action of this time evolution. Again, this is Type II∞ , which renders the
entropy well-defined up to a state-independent constant (it was also shown that imposing a lower
bound on the allowed energy of the clock further reduces the algebra to be Type II1 , which can be
understood as the condition that the algebra admits a maximally entangled state). Remarkably, it was
then shown that (in a certain class of states consistent with a semiclassical approximation) the entropy
functional for this algebra agrees with the generalised entropy formula. Since [17–19, 21], there has
been a flurry of follow-up works exploring extensions and applications of these results (see [22–39] for
a selection).
    Thus, accounting for invariance under certain gravitational gauge symmetries kills two birds with
one stone. One gets a rigorous and well-defined entropy functional that reproduces the generalised
entropy (up to a state-independent constant), and one has a physical subsystem that is invariant under
(a restricted set1 of) diffeomorphisms.
    In this paper, we will study how this construction depends on the properties of the clock used
in the crossed product. As we first pointed out in [1] (see also [54, 55]), such a clock is a QRF.
These are dynamical objects constructed out of quantum degrees of freedom. They are essential for
understanding subsystems in quantum theories with local symmetries, such as quantum gravity, where
the archetypal QRFs are quantum clocks and rods [38, 54, 56–61]. Various formalisms for working
with QRFs have emerged [59, 60, 62–86]. There is not a one-fits-all formalism because QRFs may
have different meanings and roles in different contexts, e.g. the role a QRF assumes in an operational
quantum information scenario with agents is typically a distinct one from their role in gauge systems.
These approaches thus differ in scope and this is reflected in differences in how they implement the
relevant symmetries. The particular context of a given problem should dictate which formalism is
employed. Here, we are interested in computing entropies of quantum states satisfying the gravitational
constraints; for this purpose the perspective-neutral formalism [1, 66–79] is the appropriate one, as it is
distinguished by imposing constraints on states as well as operators, and it is the one we will use. This
formalism encodes the physics of the full theory independently of any particular chosen reference frame,
enabling a ‘perspective-neutral’ description of subsystems. At the same time, it provides an explicit
way to describe physics from ‘the perspective of’ a QRF, via a so-called Page-Wootters reduction map,
going back to [87, 88]. The approach parallels the description of an abstract manifold in terms of local
coordinate patches, where the manifold itself is perspective-neutral, and each set of local coordinates
is a different frame perspective. There is a natural version of ‘quantum covariance’, implemented by
unitary maps switching between each of the frame perspectives. The formalism as we employ it here is
thus a (simplified) version of quantum geometry, which is another reason why it is particularly suited
to quantum gravity.
    In gravity, diffeomorphism invariance prevents a naïve formulation of physical subsystems associated
with fixed spacetime subregions. Gravitational QRFs allow us to evade this problem – instead of
focusing on fixed subregions, one instead defines dressed, covariant, dynamical subregions, in terms
of the quantum coordinates provided by the QRFs. The degrees of freedom inside the subregion are
also defined relative to these quantum coordinates. An immediate consequence of this is that such


   1
     In this paper, we will focus only on a single diffeomorphism, as was also done in the previous works we have described.
The question of what should be done with the other diffeomorphisms is an important one. The situation simplifies
somewhat when one considers perturbations around a spatially compact background with Killing symmetries which
fix the subregion under consideration (such as the static patch in de Sitter spacetime), where, as we explained in [40],
linearisation stability conditions [41–53] play a key role. But, in the case of a general subregion in a general spacetime,
this issue has not yet been fully addressed (though see [24, 40] for some discussion).


                                                             4
a physical subsystem depends heavily on which QRF is used to define it – and there are very many
possible choices one can make for the QRF [56–58]. For example, one could give an observer a clock,
as in [21]. But one could use any other covariant dynamical degrees of freedom as a QRF: for example,
the location at which a certain field takes on a particular value would give a quantum coordinate, and
thus a QRF (for example as in [89], or in [23, 90] where a slow-rolling inflaton field was used). One can
also think of edge modes [91–94] as QRFs [55, 57, 58, 60, 95]. As we will explain, it is also possible to
use multiple QRFs to define physical subsystems. Since using different QRFs (or different combinations
of QRFs) results in different physical subsystems, it also leads to different values for entropies [67]. It
is our aim to explore various manifestations of these phenomena, which we refer to respectively as
subsystem relativity [1, 66, 67, 71, 86, 96], and the observer-dependence of gravitational entropy.
    Two aspects regarding entropy relativity are worthwhile to emphasise. First, the observer-
dependence of gravitational entropy for a subregion does not mean that the entropy for a black
hole or a cosmological horizon depends on the QRF. Gravitational entropy relativity pertains to what
different QRFs describe as the field degrees of freedom and it turns out that these correspond to
distinct gauge-invariant subalgebras. Horizon entropy, on the other hand, includes the entropy of all
degrees of freedom (in particular also the other clocks) in- or outside the horizon and this turns out
not to depend on the QRF. It is the entropy associated with this gauge-invariant algebra that all
observers agree on.
   Second, an observer-dependence of entropy can also arise for classical reference frames, which are
external in the sense that their dynamics is not included in the description. For instance, inertial
and Rindler observers in Minkowski space assign different entropies to, say, the vacuum and this
observation can be extended to general spacetimes [97–99]. There is a key difference to the present
case, however: for the classical, non-dynamical observers, the entropy relativity arises because they
have access to distinct spacetime regions, and thus different field degrees of freedom. By contrast, the
entropy relativity we will present in Sec. 8 is qualitatively very different: separate QRFs access the
same spacetime region and field degrees of freedom, and the entropy relativity rather traces back to
the fact that the QRFs themselves are quantum subsystems contained in the region they describe.
   This paper extends previous work by generalising the construction of subsystem algebras to systems
with multiple quantum clocks, including those with degenerate energy spectra, and (briefly) periodic
clocks. We analyze the observer-dependence of the entropy and its manifestation in various regimes,
providing new insights into subsystem and entropy relativity in quantum gravity. We have already
presented a selection of our findings in the companion paper [1]. However, one of the main goals of
that paper was to also provide a useful pedagogical meeting point between the QRF and quantum
gravity communities. In that spirit, we refer to it the reader who is taking their first steps in this
burgeoning area. By contrast, the present paper will be much more technical and in-depth, with full
derivations, and many novel results, examples and details. These are structured across the remaining
sections, which we now outline to provide a roadmap for the reader.
   In Section 2 we review the pertinent details of the perspective-neutral formalism as it applies
to quantum clocks, and how they should be employed as temporal QRFs. First, we cover how to
model clocks using covariant positive operator valued measures (POVMs) and coherent states, and
describe the difference between ideal and non-ideal clocks (which are distinguished by whether or not
they have the ability to record time with arbitrary precision). Then, we explain how to impose the
gauge constraints on operators; in particular, the gauge-invariant operators of a clock and a subsystem
decompose into so-called dressed observables and reorientations, and together these form a crossed
product (or a subalgebra thereof). We describe how to also impose the gauge constraints on states, by
means of a so-called group-averaging inner product. There are two important equivalent formulations
of this procedure: the first, using refined algebraic quantisation (RAQ) [100–104], has historically


                                                    5
been more often used by proponents of QRFs, while the latter, using ‘coinvariants’, was employed
in [21]; we describe both and explain how they are related. Then we explain how the Page-Wootters
formalism may be used to ‘jump into the perspective’ of a clock, and how one may transform between
the perspectives of different clocks. We use these insights to then describe the notion of subsystem
relativity that will cause the observer-dependence of gravitational entropy later. We also comment on
how the algebra of gauge-invariant operators is represented at both the perspective-neutral and clock
perspective levels, and describe subtleties related to the properties of this representation, in particular
when the von Neumann nature of a gauge-invariant algebra survives the step from the kinematical to
the gauge-invariant Hilbert space. Various technical details relevant to this Section may be found in
Appendices A and B.
   We then describe how the perspective-neutral formalism for quantum clocks applies to perturbative
quantum gravity in Section 3, describing how the Page-Wootters (PW) framework was implicitly used
by Chandrasekaran-Longo-Penington-Witten (CLPW) [21] when describing states and observables on
which constraints have been imposed, a fact which we summarise with the informal slogan

                                             PW = CLPW.                                               (1.1)

This emphasises the role of QRFs in the definition of subsystems in quantum gravity. In particular, we
reproduce the construction of a gauge-invariant gravitational subregion algebra as the crossed product
of a type III QFT algebra with its modular flow.
    Next, in Section 4, we obtain the density operator in this algebra corresponding to an arbitrary
physical state of the full system. This proceeds by first constructing a trace on the algebra, and then
deriving the appropriate density operator. In the interest of clarity, several details of the derivation are
confined to Appendix C, and we focus at first on clocks with non-degenerate energy spectra. Unlike
previous approaches (except for the companion work [1]), we allow for arbitrary entanglement between
the clocks and the fields, and we also allow the use of multiple clocks in the definition of the subsystem.
If one is using more than one clock, we explain how one may ‘partial trace’ out a given clock to obtain
the density operator of the subsystem that would be obtained by removing that clock. We also show
how our formula reduces to that of previous work [21, 24], in the case of a ‘classical-quantum’ state
as used in that work (although our formula applies much more generally). And we comment on a
subtlety that arises when there are no ‘complementary clocks’, i.e. clocks outside of the subsystem
under consideration.
   In Section 5, we extend the analysis to degenerate clocks, i.e. those whose energy spectra are
degenerate. In the interest of simplicity, we restrict attention to the case where the multiplicity of
the energy is independent of the energy. We review how the perspective-neutral framework, including
dressed observables and reorientations, extends to this case as described in [69]. As we will explain,
defining a physical subsystem in the presence of these degeneracies necessitates some extra operational
input. In particular, in many physical scenarios, superselection over the different degeneracy sectors of
the clocks can occur. In different settings, this superselection either will or will not apply to each of
the clocks. Depending on this, the physical subsystem one should consider is associated with different
algebras of observables, and hence different density operators (and eventually different entropies). We
show how to derive the density operators in a variety of different such cases.
   Having found the density operators for the physical subsystems corresponding to gravitational
subregions relative to quantum clocks, one can in principle compute the von Neumann entropies of
these subsystems. However, for a general state this calculation is somewhat intractible, and to make
progress it helps to restrict to states within certain regimes. The most powerful of these in the present
context is the semiclassical regime, which we describe in Section 6. This regime is characterized by
a clock which behaves almost classically relative to the QFT, in the sense that the time it reads is

                                                     6
very sharply peaked at a certain value, with negligible physical fluctuations. An alternative way to
state this is that the fluctuations of the QFT Hamiltonian are suppressed relative to fluctuations of
the clock Hamiltonian. We explain how the von Neumann entropy of the density operators found
in the previous sections reduces to the generalised entropy of the gravitational subregion, at leading
order in the semiclassical approximation. Unlike previous works such as [21, 24], we do not require the
clocks and fields to be in a product state; rather we allow arbitrary entanglement (so long as this is
consistent with the semiclassical assumptions). We also explain how our result reduces to that of [21,
24] in the special case of the states investigated in those papers. We furthermore compute the linear
corrections to the semiclassical approximation, finding that these do not vanish in general (but they
do for states with no entanglement between the fields and the clocks, in agreement with [27]). In the
interest of clarity, many details of the derivations of these results are confined to Appendix D.
   Of course, semiclassical states form only a small subset of the full Hilbert space, and it is worth
also considering states that fall under other regimes. One simple scenario, which we dub the ‘anti-
semiclassical’ regime, is the opposite of the semiclassical regime in that it is characterised by clocks
whose times are subject to such large fluctuations that they cannot be meaningfully used to aid in
observations of the fields. In Section 7 we discuss this regime, and derive the density operators and
von Neumann entropies of corresponding states. In particular, we show how these may be computed
by formulae that involve simply partially tracing out the antisemiclassical clock.
   Section 8 employs all of the results previously established in the paper to demonstrate several
examples of the observer-dependence of gravitational entropy. First, we explore an explicit case
study involving a superposition of clocks experiencing Shapiro time delay after moving past a massive
body at different distances. This ‘gravitational interferometer’ example was also discussed in the
companion work [1]; here we give more details on it. Some mathematical technicalities may be found in
Appendix G. We then describe an example of how superselection over clock degeneracy sectors can lead
to observer-dependence in the entropy, via a mechanism which is independent of those explored with
the gravitational interferometer. Next, in a given system, some clocks may be subject to semiclassical
approximation, while others are subject to an antisemiclassical approximation, while still others fall
somewhere in between. This again leads to observer-dependent entropies: for the semiclassical clocks
the generalised entropy formula applies, while for the others it does not. Up to this point in the paper,
we focus on monotonic clocks, meaning those whose times are always strictly increasing. Our final
example of observer-dependence in the entropy comes from introducing periodic clocks, which were
recently investigated in the perspective-neutral framework in [70]. As we will discuss, periodic clocks
dress field degrees of freedom in different ways to monotonic clocks, and this leads to different entropy
functionals, with different statistical dependences on these degrees of freedom.
   We end the paper in Section 9 with a summary of its achievements, and a brief discussion of
some open questions. In particular, we speculate on the consequences of accounting for a larger group
of gravitational gauge symmetries, the inclusion of QRFs that transform under them, and how this
will lead to more intricate manifestations of subsystem relativity and the observer-dependence of
gravitational entropy.


2    Quantum clocks as quantum reference frames
   In the remainder of this work, we will focus on monotonic quantum clocks as temporal QRFs
associated with the (one-dimensional) translation group. This provides for a simple entry setting
for the discussion of QRFs in quantum gravity and, as we shall see in Sec. 3, encompasses recent
studies of the type conversion of local quantum field algebras in perturbative quantum gravity, e.g. see
[21, 24, 27, 30–32, 36, 105, 106]. In the absence of boundaries, these studies invoke local observers


                                                   7
equipped with quantum clocks to “dress” the QFT degrees of freedom with those of the clocks to
deparametrise the QFT modular flow. When there is a boundary, an ADM Hamiltonian appears that
is conjugate to a boundary time variable that similarly serves as a clock for dressing. The resulting
dressed algebras are so-called crossed products and admit well-defined density matrices and entropies.
These are well-defined, at least up to a state-independent constant – and, as we will describe, in some
cases a canonical choice exists to fix even this ambiguity.
   We will see that such observers with clocks are nothing but QRFs and hence that the discussion of
crossed products in gravity has a natural interpretation in terms of QRFs. This perspective will also
permit us to generalise this construction to arbitrarily many observers and to explore the observer
dependence of subregion density operators and entropies already summarised in [1]. In our exposition
of quantum clocks as temporal QRFs, we will largely follow [68, 69]. Invoking the generalisation of
that formalism to QRFs associated with general symmetry groups [66] to extend our results on crossed
products, density operators and entropies to more general QRFs will be left for future work.2

2.1       Modelling clocks with covariant POVMs
    Taken as a temporal QRF, a monotonic clock will be modelled by a Hilbert space HC on which
its Hamiltonian HC generates a unitary representation of the translation group (R, +) via UC (t) =
exp(−itHC ). The clock’s ‘frame orientation’ is the time τ it reads, and our main concern will be to
construct suitable orientation states and observables. For monotonic clocks we have τ ∈ R, so that
orientations take values in the translation group. Ideally, we would like to construct an orientation
observable conjugate to the clock Hamiltonian, [T, HC ] = i, so that we can think of the latter as
generating monotonic “reorientations” of the clock. Of course, if HC is bounded, Pauli’s argument
tells us that such a T cannot be self-adjoint [107]. Unruh and Wald [108] refined this observation
(dropping canonical conjugacy), showing that bounded clock Hamiltonians do not admit self-adjoint
monotonic time operators. The way out is to drop insisting on self-adjointness, and to invoke covariant
positive operator-valued measures (POVMs) to build clock observables, and a consistent probability
interpretation for the readings of the clock [68, 69, 83, 109–113].
   For simplicity, we shall assume in the remainder that the spectrum σC := Spec(HC ) is purely
continuous and for clarity we begin with the case when the spectrum is further nondegenerate.
Degenerate clock Hamiltonians, such as HC = p2 for some momentum p, will be discussed separately
in Sec. 5.3 Following [68], the clock states can then be constructed via4
                                                1
                                                       Z
                                         |t⟩ = √                dϵ eig(ϵ) e−itϵ |ϵ⟩ ,                               (2.1)
                                                 2π     σC

where g(ϵ) is an arbitrary phase, accounting for the fact that an operator conjugate to HC is unique
only up to addition of arbitrary functions of HC . They are covariant

                                                 UC (τ ) |t⟩ = |t + τ ⟩ ,                                           (2.2)

and furnish a resolution of the identity
                                        Z                   Z
                                              dt |t⟩⟨t| =         dϵ |ϵ⟩⟨ϵ| = 1C .                                  (2.3)
                                          R                 σC



   2
    More general crossed product constructions have already been explored in [54, 55], however using an inequivalent
approach to QRFs that does not impose constraints on states unlike here and e.g. in [21, 24, 27, 30].
   3
    Periodic clocks (U(1) reference frames) can be treated similarly, however, the ensuing relational dynamics is somewhat
more subtle [70]. We comment on this case in Subsec. 8.4.
   4
       We are using the symmetric convention for 2π factors in Fourier transformations in contrast to [68, 69].


                                                                  8
We may thus think of them as generalised (and distributional) coherent states associated with the
translation group.
    In order to construct a probability measure, we define effect operators
                                                           Z
                                           EC (X) =                   dt |t⟩⟨t| ≥ 0                                (2.4)
                                                           X⊂R

for any (Borel) subset X of the set of possible clock readings R (e.g. some time interval). Thanks to the
normalisation in Eq. (2.3) and the fact that EC (∪i Xi ) = i EC (Xi ) for any disjoint Xi (σ-additivity),
                                                            P

the effect operators form an operator-valued probability measure over the subsets of clock readings.
For example, ⟨φ| EC (X) |φ⟩ is the probability that the clock reading lies in X for the state |φ⟩ ∈ HC .
Further thanks to Eq. (2.2), we have for all X
                                       UC (τ )EC (X)UC† (τ ) = EC (X + τ ),                                        (2.5)
and so the POVM is covariant with respect to the translation group generated by HC .
    The clock states need not be perfectly distinguishable
                                                 1
                                                     Z
                                                                         ′
                                      t t′ =              dϵ eiϵ(t−t ) =: χ(t − t′ ) ,                             (2.6)
                                                2π   σC

since, when σC is just an interval, their overlap reads
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                  δ(t − t′ )                                           σC = R ,
                                                                                  
                                  1 iϵmin (t−t′ )
                            ′
                    χ(t − t ) = 2π  e               πδ(t − t′ ) + iP t−t
                                                                      1
                                                                        ′               σC = [ϵmin , ∞),           (2.7)
                                              ′              ′
                               
                                i eiϵmin (t−t ) −eiϵmax (t−t )                         σC = [ϵmin , ϵmax ] ,
                               
                               
                                 2π             t−t′

where P denotes the Cauchy principal value [68].5 When σC is given by a collection of disjoint intervals,
the overlap will be given by a corresponding sum over these intervals of expressions as in the third line.
Clock readings are thus only perfectly distinguishable when the Hamiltonian is unbounded, σC = R,
a case sometimes referred to as an ideal (or perfect) clock. Unless σC is bounded in both directions,
clock states are also distributional. For later purpose, we explain in App. A.1 that a Fourier transform
continues to exist even when σC is bounded.
    We can define the moment operators associated with the covariant clock POVM as
                                                           Z
                                                T (n) :=           dt tn |t⟩⟨t| .                                  (2.8)
                                                               R

Unless the clock is ideal, we have T (n) ̸= (T (1) )n and these operators are not self-adjoint but only
symmetric [68, 109, 110]. In particular, the clock states |t⟩ are only eigenstates of the moment
operators when the clock is ideal. Nevertheless, they satisfy canonical commutation relations with the
Hamiltonian [68, Proof of Lemma 2]
                                                [T (n) , HC ] = inT (n−1) ,                                        (2.9)
and are thus conjugate to it.
   The sought-after clock orientation observable is given by the covariant POVM and all its moments.
While these moments need not be self-adjoint, the effect operators EC (X) are, thereby yielding well-
defined probabilities over the clock readings, even though the latter need not be perfectly distinguishable.
Specifically, the non-monotonicity issue for clocks with bounded Hamiltonian reported by Unruh and
Wald [108] is sidestepped thanks to the covariance of the POVM [68].


   5
       The term in parentheses in the middle case can also be understood as an iε prescription, since limε→0+ t−t1′ +iε =
   1              ′
P t−t′ − iπδ(t − t ).




                                                                     9
2.2      Constraints, relational observable algebras and crossed products
   Let us now add some system S that may evolve relative to quantum clock C. The total (kinematical)
Hilbert space is thus taken to be Hkin = HS ⊗ HC . The system S may itself be composite and its
Hilbert space given by a tensor product of a collection of Hilbert spaces. In particular, later S will
contain additional clocks and it may also contain QFT Hilbert spaces.
   Evolution relative to C means that we are considering relational dynamics. This entails that
we treat the total Hamiltonian, for simplicity assumed to be free of interactions between clock and
system,6 as a gauge constraint
                                          H = HS + HC .                                       (2.10)
At this stage, we make no further assumption about the system Hamiltonian HS . Thanks to our
above assumptions on the clock Hamiltonian HC , the constraint H is a translation group generator on
Hkin . We may interpret it as corresponding to time evolution of the combined SC system in some
(possibly fictitious) external time. By treating this as a gauge symmetry, we are taking this external
time evolution to be physically inaccessible, instead aiming for an internal evolution.
   While this perspective can be applied to laboratory systems where external time is not fictitious, in
gravitational systems without boundary (and more generally reparametrisation-invariant systems) as
discussed later, this perspective is forced upon us by diffeomorphism invariance. The latter leads to
Hamiltonian constraints and to what is sometimes known as the infamous problem of time [116–118]. It
means nothing else than that in gravity degrees of freedom do not evolve relative to some background
time, but relative to one another.
   The translation group USC (t) = exp(−itH) generated by the constraint can be viewed as corre-
sponding to reorientations of an external clock frame, while Eqs. (2.2) and (2.9) entail that the one
generated by HC implements reorientations of the internal clock C. The former are gauge, the latter
are physical since [USC (t), 1S ⊗ UC (t′ )] = 0, hence UC (t′ ) acts in a gauge-invariant way and changes
the relation between clock and system.
    Let us now consider the algebra of gauge-invariant observables. Let AS ⊆ B(HS ) be some
algebra acting on the system such that time evolution US (t) = exp(−itHS ) constitutes a group
of automorphisms of it. In particular, HS need not necessarily be part of AS in which case these
autormorphisms are outer; this will be the case in perturbative quantum gravity below. In appendix A.2,
we show that the gauge-invariant algebra of observables of the clock and system on Hkin is given by
relational observables and clock reorientations:
                                                     D                                         E
                     Ainv := (AS ⊗ B(HC ))H = OC
                                               τ
                                                 (a), 1S ⊗ UC (t) a ∈ AS , t ∈ R .                                (2.11)

⟨A, B⟩ denotes the algebra generated by operators of the form A, B. For the moment, we leave implicit
what the topology is in which this algebra is closed. When AS is a general C ∗ -algebra, closure will be
with respect to the C ∗ -norm of the tensor product of Hilbert spaces HR ⊗ HS , yielding the C ∗ -tensor
product. When AS is more specifically a von Neumann algebra,7 the main focus later, closure will
be defined in terms of the double commutant and we will highlight this by writing ⟨A, B⟩′′ for the
von Neumann algebra generated by A, B.8 {UC (t)}t∈R are the clock reorientations. Furthermore, the


   6
       Relational dynamics in the presence of interactions is challenging and has been touched upon in [112, 114, 115].
   7
       Hence, A′′S = AS , where ′′ denotes the bicommutant on HS .
   8
     AS could also be the algebra of polynomials in some basic set of generators and may thereby not be contained in
the algebra of bounded operators, in which case the tensor product is an algebraic one.



                                                            10
relational observables describing the system property a conditioned on the clock reading τ are given
by a G-twirl (also known as ‘incoherent group averaging’) over the gauge group:
                        Z
                                                        †
                                                                   Z                 X in
             τ
            OC (a) :=        dt USC (t) (a ⊗ |τ ⟩⟨τ |) USC (t) =       dt |t⟩⟨t| ⊗            (t − τ )n [a, HS ]n ,       (2.12)
                         R                                         R                 n=0
                                                                                         n!

where |τ ⟩ are the clock states in Eq. (2.1) and [·, ·]n denotes the nth nested commutator with
[a, HS ]0 = a; note that the latter expression is an expansion in the moments of the clock POVM. As
shown in [68], these are quantisations of the classical relational observables for Hamiltonian constrained
systems in [119].9 For ideal clocks, the relational observables take a particularly simple form [68]
                                             τ
                                            OC (a) = e−i(T −τ )HS a ei(T −τ )HS ,                                         (2.13)

since in this case the first moment operator T = T (1) is self-adjoint and the clock states are its
eigenstates.
   For later purpose we note in appendix A.2 that if AS is a von Neumann algebra, then so is the
gauge-invariant algebra (AS ⊗ B(HC ))H . In particular, if in addition the clock C is ideal (and hence
HC = L2 (R)), then this algebra equals the crossed product of AS with the translation group generated
by HS (e.g., see [19, 21, 24]):
                                D                                              E′′                            H
               AS ⋊US R ≃ e−iT HS a eiT HS , e−itHC a ∈ AS , t ∈ R                   = AS ⊗ B(L2 (R)C )               .   (2.14)

More generally, from the point of view of QRFs, we can give crossed products the following interpreta-
tion:
        The crossed product of a von Neumann algebra A by a locally compact group G is the von
        Neumann algebra of relational observables describing A relative to an ideal QRF associated
        with G, and its reorientations.
We can thus think of the gauge-invariant clock-system algebra in Eq. (2.11) as a generalisation of the
crossed product to encompass non-ideal clocks, as well as the case when AS is a C ∗ algebra but not
necessarily von Neumann. We emphasise that, at this stage, the von Neumann nature of these algebras
(i.e. their closure) is defined in terms of the kinematical Hilbert space Hkin . We will be discussing the
construction of the physical Hilbert space shortly and will later investigate whether the action of these
algebras on this space remains von Neumann.
   Below, we shall be mostly concerned with such generalised crossed products of a type III1 von
Neumann factor AS ,10 interpreted as an algebra containing regional QFT and graviton degrees of
freedom (and possibly additional clocks), by a group associated with its modular flow. That is, we
will focus on the case that HS is the modular Hamiltonian of a cyclic separating vector |Ψ⟩ ∈ HS
for AS . This is the case in which a conversion to type II factors with well-defined density operators
and entropies occurs (at least up to a state-independent constant) [19, 21, 23, 24, 27, 30–32, 36–38,
90]. In appendix A.2, we provide some intuition for this and explain that it is the addition of the
clock reorientations to the dressed regional algebra that turns the modular flow inner and thereby is
responsible for the type conversion (modular flow in type III algebras is always outer). But for now
the discussion remains more general than von Neumann algebras.


   9
     For the generalisation of relational observables to QRFs associated with general symmetry groups, see [66, 82], and
for a related approach to relational observables associated with clocks see also [120–123].
  10
       AS being a factor means it has a trivial center, i.e. only c-numbers commute with all other elements in AS .



                                                             11
2.3    The physical Hilbert space
    Next, let us implement constraints also on states to construct the physical Hilbert space of gauge
invariant states in line with our interpretation that the external evolution generated by H is physically
inaccessible. While this step is standard in gauge theories, gravity and string theory, it singles out the
perspective-neutral approach [66–69, 71–78, 80, 115, 124] we employ here from within the approaches
to QRFs.11 We can view the kinematical Hilbert space Hkin as the space of externally distinguishable
states and the physical Hilbert space Hphys as the one of internally distinguishable states from which
all external frame information has been removed [67, Sec. II]. We thus seek to implement a form of
Dirac constraint quantisation [126, 127] and states formally satisfying a version of the Wheeler-DeWitt
equation:
                          USC (t)|Ψ) = |Ψ) ,      ∀t ∈ R      ⇒       H|Ψ) = 0.                     (2.15)
In the sequel, we shall be using round bras and kets, |·), to denote such physical states, while we
reserve the standard bra-ket notation for kinematical or gauge-reduced states.
   A word of caution on the meaning of Eq. (2.15) for the case of a noncompact gauge group as
the translation group here: as zero will lie in the continuous spectrum of H, a state such as |Ψ)
corresponds to an improper eigenstate and thus cannot be normalisable in the original Hkin . To address
this normalisation issue, we have to build a new inner product to turn the space of states formally
obeying Eq. (2.15) into a Hilbert space. Here, we will briefly recall two equivalent ways of constructing
such a new Hilbert space Hphys that will be convenient below: the procedure of co-invariants, also
invoked by CLPW [21], and Refined Algebraic quantisation (RAQ) [100–104], usually employed in the
perspective-neutral approach to QRFs [66, 68]. Rather than viewing |Ψ) as an element of Hkin , RAQ
takes it as a distribution on it.
   The space of co-invariants is the space of gauge-equivalent kinematical states, i.e. |ψ⟩ ∼ |ϕ⟩ iff
|ψ⟩ = USC (t) |ϕ⟩ for some t ∈ R. This space of equivalence classes does not possess a linear structure,
unless we impose the additional relation that the differences between gauge-equivalent states are
equivalent to null states, i.e. (1 − USC (t)) |ψ⟩ ∼
                                                  ˆ 0 for all t ∈ R and |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin . This means in particular
      ˆ 0 for all |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin . Quotienting the space of co-invariants by these null vectors yields a vector
H |ψ⟩ ∼
space, whose elements we denote by |Ψ) and it is clear that gauge translations act trivially on this
space, in that sense realising Eq. (2.15). An inner product on this space is given by group averaging
                                                    Z
                                     (Ψ1 |Ψ2 ) :=        dt ⟨ψ1 | USC (t) |ψ2 ⟩ ,                                 (2.16)
                                                     R
where |ψi ⟩ ∈ Hkin resides in the equivalence class |Ψi ) and the inner product under the integral is the
standard one on Hkin .12 The physical Hilbert space Hphys is then given by completing in norm. This
is essentially the route taken by CLPW [21, App. B.1]. Abstractly, this procedure defines a linear map
M : Hkin → Hphys that implements the constraint in the sense that M H = 0, and the core question
is how to explicitly construct it. CLPW provide a method within their setup [21, Sec. 4.2] (see also
Example 1 below, and Sec. 3.2.1).


  11
     See [67, Sec. II] for a discussion of how this step distinguishes the perspective-neutral approach from the quantum
information one [85, 86] (going back to [62, 125]), the purely perspective-dependent one [65, 81] and the operational one
[82, 83], which do not implement constraints on states. The purely perspective-dependent one turns out to be equivalent
to the perspective-neutral one for ideal QRFs (perfectly distinguishable orientation states), however, not for general
non-ideal ones [66]. Within quantum information theory and the foundations of quantum theory there exist varying aims
for the use of QRFs, which is why several approaches have developed, and there is not a one-fits-all approach. Here, we
employ the one which applies to gauge theories and gravity.
  12
     Whether or not this physical inner product is positive semidefinite is in general unknown, as is convergence of the
integral, though see [51, 52, 100, 101, 104, 128] for some discussion on this. In what follows, we shall simply assume
convergence and semidefiniteness.


                                                             12
   To prepare the grounds for establishing its equivalence with a Page-Wootters reduction of gauge-
invariant states constructed via RAQ, we note that we can think of the inner product as (Ψ1 |Ψ2 ) =
⟨ψ1 | M † M |ψ2 ⟩ = ⟨ψ1 | Πphys |ψ2 ⟩, where (assuming we can take the integral inside the inner product)
                                                                  Z
                                                  Πphys =              dt USC (t)                                   (2.17)
                                                                   R
is sometimes informally referred to as a coherent group averaging ‘projector’, though it is not literally
a projector (it is essentially δ(H)). This formally defines an anti-linear ‘rigging map’ [100], the core
ingredient of RAQ,
                                           η(|ψ⟩) := ⟨ψ| Πphys                                     (2.18)
from kinematical states into kinematical distributions. Their key property is that, thanks to
the translation invariance of the integral measure, states in the image of η are gauge-invariant,
USC (t)η(|ψ⟩) := η(USC (t) |ψ⟩) = η(|ψ⟩).13 It is for this reason that the states in the image also corre-
spond to equivalence classes of kinematical states. We can thus set (Ψ′ | = η(|ψ⟩) for representatives
of physical states, where for distinction from the co-invariant case we equip them with a ′ , and their
inner product is given as before by group averaging, so14
                            (Ψ′1 |Ψ′2 ) := η(|ψ1 ⟩) (|ψ2 ⟩) = ⟨ψ1 | Πphys |ψ2 ⟩ = (Ψ1 |Ψ2 ) .                       (2.19)
Quotienting by null vectors and completing in norm then yields an equivalent representation of
 ′
Hphys ≃ Hphys of the physical Hilbert space.
Example 1. A simple example is given by the constraint H = pS + pC for two ideal clocks on Hkin =
L2 (R2 ), with pS , pC two momentum operators. Defining q± := qC ±qS , any kinematical state can be writ-
ten as |ψ⟩ = dq + dq − ψ(q+ , q− ) |q+ , q− ⟩, where |q+ , q− ⟩ = √12 |qC = 1/2(q+ + q− ), qS = 1/2(q+ − q− )⟩
              R

are eigenstates of q± .
   Following the co-invariant way, we notice that |ψ⟩ ∼ USC (t) |ψ⟩ entails |q+ , q− ⟩ ∼ |q+ + t, q− ⟩
and (1 − USC (t)) |ψ⟩ ∼
                      ˆ 0 implies |q+ , q− ⟩ − |q+ + t, q− ⟩ ∼
                                                             ˆ 0. As USC (t) acts ergodically on the q+ label
and trivially on q− , the conjunction of these relations means that for each fixed q− , there is (up
to normalisation) a unique surviving equivalence class of basis states; let us denote it by |q− ). By
Eq. (2.16), we have (q− |q−
                          ′ ) = δ(q −q ′ ). Physical states can thus be written as |Ψ) =
                                                                                              R dq − Ψ(q− )|q− )
                                                                                            R
                                   −     −
with Ψ square-integrable, so Hphys ≃ L2 (R).
   On the other hand, in momentum representation the ‘rigging map’ Eq. (2.18) of RAQ reads
                                                        Z
                                    ′
                                 (Ψ | = η(|ψ⟩) =                dp− ψ ∗ (0, p− ) ⟨p+ = 0, p− | .                    (2.20)
                                                            R
While such improper null eigenstates of H = p+ are clearly not normalisable in Hkin , we have
                                                        Z
                                        (Ψ′1 |Ψ′2 ) =       dp− ψ1∗ (0, p− )ψ2 (0, p− ),                            (2.21)
                                                        R
whose absolute value is bounded if ψ1 , ψ2 are bounded around p+ = 0. Null states are those with
ψ(0, p− ) = 0 (i.e., by Fourier transformation, states such that dq + ψ(q+ , q− ) = 0). Quotienting by
                                                                R
                         ′
these, we again have Hphys   ≃ L2 (R) in agreement with the construction via co-invariants.


  13
     Somewhat more accurately, we have η : D → D∗ , where D ⊂ Hkin is a linear dense subspace closed under gauge
transformations and D∗ is its algebraic dual (space of all linear functionals as opposed to only continuous ones). This
leads to the triple D ,→ Hkin ,→ D∗ , which inspires the name ‘rigging map’. D∗ inherits an action of the gauge group
                       †
via USC (t)ξ[ϕ] = ξ[USC   (t)ϕ], for any ξ ∈ D∗ and ϕ ∈ D. Gauge invariance should be understood in the sense that
                             †
USC (t)η(ψ1 )[ψ2 ] = η(ψ1 )[USC (t)ψ2 ] = η(ψ1 )[ψ2 ] for all ψ1 , ψ2 ∈ D and t ∈ R. See [100, 101, 104] for details.
  14
    We could also define an inner product on the image of η as (η(|ψ2 ⟩), η(|ψ1 ⟩)) := η(|ψ1 ⟩) (|ψ2 ⟩) = ⟨ψ1 | Πphys |ψ2 ⟩.
Relative to the left inner product, we can again interpret η † η = Πphys as in the case of the co-invariant map M .


                                                                   13
   The observation that the co-invariant construction and RAQ lead to equivalent physical Hilbert
spaces was also noted in the context of Jackiw-Teitelboim gravity in [129].
   In this section, we shall at times operate with the co-invariant and RAQ representations of physical
states in parallel, emphasising how certain maps and expressions appear in the two. This is to facilitate
exhibiting the relation between the subjects of gravitational crossed product algebras and QRFs, where
the former so far invoked co-invariants and the latter RAQ. In later sections, for definiteness, we shall
mostly invoke the co-invariant scheme and only sometimes comment on how expressions change in the
equivalent RAQ formulation.
   Henceforth, when pursuing the RAQ formalism, we shall abuse notation somewhat, writing, as is
standard in much of the physics literature on relational dynamics,

                                                     |Ψ′ ) = Πphys |ψ⟩ ,                               (2.22)

instead of Eq. (2.18), keeping in mind however that physical states can be unnderstood as distributions
on Hkin . As Πphys is formally symmetric in the kinematical inner product, this does not cause
problems. In particular, decomposing kinematical states in the clock and system energy bases,
|ψ⟩ = σC dϵ σS λE ψ(ϵ; E, λE ) |ϵ⟩ ⊗ |E, λE ⟩, where λE is a possible degeneracy label for system
       R     R P
             P

energy E and σS denotes the spectrum of HS , we can then write physical states formally as [68]
                                                     Z
                      ′
                   |Ψ ) = Πphys |ψ⟩ = 2π                          ψ(−E; E, λE ) |−E⟩ ⊗ |E, λE ⟩ ,      (2.23)
                                                     X       X

                                                 σS ∩(−σC ) λE

while the inner product becomes
                                                Z
                          (Ψ′1 |Ψ′2 ) = 2π                   ψ1∗ (−E, E, λE )ψ2 (−E; E, λE ).          (2.24)
                                                X       X

                                             σS ∩(−σC ) λE


2.4     Physical representation of the algebra
   Although our gauge-invariant algebra Ainv := (AS ⊗ B(HC ))H ⊆ (B(Hkin ))H ⊂ B(Hkin ) has been
originally defined on the kinematical Hilbert space, we will be interested in its representation on the
space of physical states Hphys (see App. A.2 for detail). While the latter is a different Hilbert space,
this action is defined because gauge-invariant observables “commute” with the co-invariant map M
above in the sense that

                  M O |ψ⟩ = r(O)M |ψ⟩ = r(O)|Ψ) ,                           kin and |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin ,
                                                                     ∀ O ∈ AH                          (2.25)

where
                                                  kin := (B(Hkin )) .
                                                                   H
                                                 AH                                                    (2.26)
r : AHkin → B(Hphys ) defines here the physical representation of the kinematical gauge-invariant
algebra on the physical Hilbert space Hphys defined the co-invariant way. Equivalently, kinematical
gauge-invariant observables formally commute with the RAQ rigging map η [100, 101, 104]:

                             Ψ′ r′ (O† ) := η(O |ψ⟩) = ⟨ψ| O† Πphys = ⟨ψ| Πphys O† ,                   (2.27)

where r′ now denotes the physical representation of kinematical gauge-invariant operators defined the
RAQ way. Using the slightly sloppy notation from Eq. (2.22), this becomes

                                     r′ (O) Ψ′ = Πphys O |ψ⟩ = OΠphys |ψ⟩                              (2.28)
                                                 


and is formally consistent with the inner product:

                (Ψ′1 |r′ (O)|Ψ′2 ) = ⟨ψ1 | OΠphys |ψ2 ⟩ = η(O† |ψ1 ⟩)(|ψ2 ⟩) = (r′ (O† )Ψ′1 |Ψ′2 ) .   (2.29)

                                                             14
Formally we can thus write r′ (O) = O when it is clear that we mean that O acts on physical states.
One has to be careful with this, however, as r′ (equivalently r) is not generally faithful: there exist
O1 , O2 ∈ AHkin , such that O1 =
                               ̸ O2 on Hkin , but r′ (O1 ) = r′ (O2 ) [68, Lemma 1]. For instance, any
observable in Akin that has exclusively support on energies inconsistent with solving the constraints will
                  H

be mapped to zero under r′ (equivalently r).15 For the relational observables in Eq. (2.12) r′ (O) = O
on physical states formally trades the incoherent for coherent group averaging since
                                      τ
                                     OC (a)Πphys = Πphys (a ⊗ |τ ⟩⟨τ |)Πphys .                                   (2.30)

For notational simplicity, we shall henceforth write r′ (O) = O with the implicit understanding that
this holds on physical states. While the formulations in Eqs. (2.25) and (2.27) are cleaner, expressions
such as Eqs. (2.23) and (2.30) are somewhat more explicit.
    The properties of this physical representation r(Ainv ) (equivalently r′ ) may be quite different from
those of Ainv on Hkin . For example, as we shall see below in Sec. 2.8, while Ainv is von Neumann provided
AS is, the same is no longer guaranteed for r(Ainv ) because the notion of algebraic closure is now
defined with respect to different structures (though in many cases of interest it will be von Neumann).
Related to this, r (equivalently r′ ) is not faithful as noted above. (It may be faithful on subalgebras of
AHkin , cf. Sec. 2.8). This has repercussions for whether or not the frame reorientations 1S ⊗ UC (τ ) in
Ainv (cf. Eq. (2.11)) survive as independent observables on Hphys (respectively Hphys  ′   ): when HS ∈ AS
and US (τ ) are inner automorphisms (standard QRF setup), then HC and HS are not independent
operators in r(Ainv ) and so the clock reorientations are contained in (the representation of) the
relational observables on Hphys . By contrast, when HS ∈    / AS and US (τ ) are outer automorphisms (case
of perturbative quantum gravity and QFT below), then the clock reorientations remain independent
within r(Ainv ) and are not included in the relational observables.
   For the physical representation of relational observables and reorientations, we shall henceforth
write
                         OCτ
                             (a) := r(OC
                                       τ
                                         (a)) ,        VC (τ ) := r(UC (τ )) ,                (2.31)
in the language of co-invariants. By contrast, we continue to use OC  τ (a), U (τ ) in the physical
                                                                              C
representation of the RAQ method, in line with our conventions above.

2.5    “Jumping into a clock frame”: the Page-Wootters formalism
   Now that we have a QRF, we would like to “jump into its perspective” and describe the remaining
degrees of freedom, hence the system S, relative to it. For clocks this means nothing else than
describing the evolution of S relative to C. There are two equivalent ways of doing so, both of which
will be useful later on:
gauge-invariant: The first amounts to simply evaluating the relational observables OC
                                                                                    τ (a) in Eq. (2.12)

    in physical states |Ψ) ∈ Hphys and letting the clock reading parameter τ run.
gauge-fixed: The second conditions physical states on the clock reading, yielding a relational
    Schrödinger picture in which states of S evolve in τ . This is the Page-Wootters formalism
    [87, 88] (see [68–70, 77, 112, 115, 130–134] for some later developments).
We have essentially already seen the first path, so we introduce here briefly the Page-Wootters (PW)
formalism. We will see in Sec. 3.2 that the procedure considered by CLPW [21] (and adopted by JSS
in [24]) to implement the constraint is equivalent to it. To this end, we will follow the formulation of


  15
     Examples of such observables can be built diagonally in the energy bases of clock and system with exclusive support
in the complement of the spectral intersection σS ∩ (−σC ) in Eq. (2.23).


                                                          15
the PW-formalism in [68–70],16 which establishes its equivalence with the gauge-invariant formulation
and thereby resolves three fundamental criticisms that Kuchař had raised against the formalism [116],
disrupting research on the topic for some time.17 It also connects it with the QRF paradigm.

2.5.1       Relational Schrödinger picture
We will first exhibit the traditional formulation of the PW-formalism, which invokes solutions to the
constraint, and thus is best expressed in RAQ. We will then translate it into the equivalent language
of co-invariants.
   The aim of PW was to construct a conditional probability interpretation of “timeless” physical states.
This can be achieved by defining a reduction map R′C (τ ) : Hphys
                                                              ′   → H|C , conditioning physical states
on clock C reading τ (the primes highlight that we are invoking the RAQ imposition of constraints):

                                                   R′C (τ ) := ⟨τ | ⊗ 1S ,                                              (2.32)

where |τ ⟩ is a clock state (2.1) and H|C ⊆ HS is the system subspace consistent with implementing
the constraint (it is spanned by eigenstates of HS residing in the overlap σS ∩ (−σC ), cf. (2.23)). It is
the space of system states “seen” by clock C. For later, we note that the orthogonal projector onto
this subspace is formally given by [68]
                                                      Z                          Z
                           Π|C = ⟨τ | Πphys |τ ⟩ =          dt χ∗ (t)US (t) =         dϵ δ(HS + ϵ),                     (2.33)
                                                        R                        σC

where χ(t) is the clock state overlap distribution (2.7) and Πphys was defined in Eq. (2.17). Note
that we have Π|C = 1S only for ideal clocks. In the case that the clock spectrum is an interval
σC = [ϵmin , ϵmax ], this takes the more explicit form

                                        Π|C = Θ(ϵmax + HS )Θ(−ϵmin − HS ).                                              (2.34)

   It is well-known that the conditional states

                                                 |ψ|C (τ )⟩ := R′C (τ ) Ψ′                                              (2.35)
                                                                             


solve the Schrödinger equation in the clock readings
            d                 d
               |ψ|C (τ )⟩ = i    τ ′ UC† (τ − τ ′ ) ⊗ 1S Ψ′ = − ⟨τ | HC ⊗ 1S Ψ′ = HS |ψ|C (τ )⟩ .                       (2.36)
                                                                              
        i
            dτ                dτ
This remains true regardless of whether HS ∈ AS . This time evolution is an internal, gauge-invariant
one, as the derivation invokes the clock reorientations UC (τ ) ⊗ 1S and their equivalence with the
system time evolution 1C ⊗ US (−τ ) on Hphys
                                         ′   .


  16
    For generalisations of the PW-formalism to QRFs associated with general symmetry groups and first steps in
quantum field theory, see [66] and [115], respectively.
  17
     Kuchař argued that the PW-formalism would yield (a) conditional probabilities that are incompatible with the
constraint, (b) incorrect transition probabilities, and (c) wrong localisation probabilities in relativistic settings [116]. (a)
and (b) were resolved in [68] through the equivalence with the gauge-invariant formulation, while (c) was resolved in [69]
using the covariant clock POVMs for quadratic Hamiltonians exhibited in Sec. 5.1. Giovannetti et al. [132] proposed
an earlier resolution of (b), which does lead to correct transition probabilities but modifies the constraint by including
measurement interactions and ancilla systems and further relies on ideal clocks. The resolution in [68] is not restricted to
ideal clocks and solves the problem in a more general form than originally posed by Kuchař. The qualitative differences
between the two resolutions of (b) have been further investigated in [135].



                                                               16
   The observation in [68–70] is that the conditioning on clock readings in Eq. (2.32) is nothing but a
gauge fixing and its inverse, R′C † (τ ) : H|C → Hphys
                                                  ′    , is formally given by averaging over the gauge
                                                                   Z
                            R′C † (τ )[·] = Πphys ([·] ⊗ |τ ⟩) =           dt US (t − τ )[·] ⊗ |t⟩ .                (2.37)
                                                                   R

The reduction map and its inverse are unitary and we have18

                           (Ψ′1 |Ψ′2 ) = Ψ′1 (1S ⊗ |τ ⟩⟨τ |) Ψ′2 kin = ⟨ψ|C
                                                                         1
                                                                            (τ )|ψ|C
                                                                                  2
                                                                                     (τ )⟩ ,                        (2.38)
                                                                       


where the right expression is the standard inner product on H|C (inherited from HS ). By the
intermediate expression, we mean the matrix element of 1S ⊗ |τ ⟩⟨τ | in the physical states |Ψ′i ) viewed
as kinematical distributions and thus evaluated in the kinematical inner product. This expression
follows from the left hand side, using the definitions in Eqs. (2.16) and (2.17) and the formal identity
Πphys (1S ⊗ |τ ⟩⟨τ |) Πphys = Πphys [66, 68], which follows from the resolution of the identity in Eq. (2.3).
This intermediate expression highlights that the right side is just a gauge-fixing of the physical
inner product. We can interpret the reduction map R′C (τ ) as a “quantum coordinate map” into the
perspective of the temporal QRF C. The subscript |C for objects in its image thus stands for “relative
to clock C”.
   Given that the conditioning on the clock reading is a gauge fixing, one might now be worried that
the Schrödinger evolution in τ described by Eq. (2.36) is one tangential to a gauge orbit and hence
unphysical. At the same time, we argued above that this same evolution should be physical, and so
transversal to a gauge orbit, because it invokes the clock reorientations. While at first these statements
seem to contradict one another, both are in fact correct. To see this, we note that Eq. (2.37) implies
that physical states can also be written as
                                                     Z
                                             Ψ′ =         dt |ψ|C (t)⟩ ⊗ |t⟩ .                                      (2.39)
                                                
                                                      R

This is behind the slogan “time from entanglement”, though we emphasise that this entanglement
is defined with respect to a tensor product structure on Hkin as opposed to one on Hphys     ′    [68, 71,
115]. This way of writing physical states makes transparent that the full Schrödinger trajectory
{ |ψ|C (τ )⟩ | τ ∈ R} is encoded both tangentially along a gauge orbit, as well as transversally to it, see
Fig. 2.1. It is encoded tangentially because we can obtain the full trajectory from the same physical
state |Ψ′ ) (which corresponds to one gauge orbit) just by running through all gauges τ in R′C (τ ) |Ψ′ ).
Conversely, it is encoded transversally also because the same trajectory can be obtained by gauge fixing
every state in the physical Hilbert space trajectory {(US (τ ) ⊗ 1C ) |Ψ′ ) | τ ∈ R} (which satisfies the
Schrödinger equation on Hphys ′  ) in the same way, e.g. with R′C (0). When we say that the Schrödinger
evolution is physical, we have this transversal evolution in mind.
   Let us now translate the Page-Wootters formalism into the language of co-invariants. To this end,
we recall that |Ψ) = M |ψ⟩, |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin , and M † M = Πphys . Hence, to obtain the same relational
Schrödinger picture on H|C via a reduction RC (τ ) : Hphys → H|C with

                                               |ψ|C (τ )⟩ = RC (τ ) |Ψ) ,                                           (2.40)

where the unprimed notation now clarifies that we are working with co-invariants, we must have

                                              RC (τ )M = R′C (τ ) Πphys .                                           (2.41)


  18
      Physical states are here taken in the form (2.22). If the more precise Eq. (2.18) was used instead, the reduction and
its inverse would have to be taken in “daggered” form. The relation of the inner products would be unaffected.


                                                            17
                 Figure 2.1: The Schrödinger evolution of |ψ|C (τ )⟩ stemming from |Ψ′ ) can
                 be obtained in two ways. The tangential decoding is achieved by acting with
                 R′|C (τ ) on |Ψ) for different values of τ . Alternatively, the transversal decoding
                 first requires the trajectory US (τ ) |Ψ′ ) for different values of τ on which we
                 then act with the same R′|C (0).


The “dagger” of this relation has to be defined with respect to the appropriate inner product. Since
we have (Ψ′1 |Ψ′2 ) = ⟨ψ1 | Πphys |ψ2 ⟩ = ⟨ψ1 | R′C † (τ )R′C (τ )Πphys |ψ2 ⟩ = ⟨ψ|C
                                                                                  1 (τ )|ψ 2 (τ )⟩ and this must be
                                                                                          |C
equal to ⟨ψ1 | M † R†C (τ )RC (τ )M |ψ2 ⟩ = ⟨ψ1 | M † M |ψ2 ⟩ = (Ψ1 |Ψ2 ) and Πphys is not a projector, this
leads to the inverse relation for R†C (τ ) : H|C → Hphys with

                                                M † R†C (τ ) = R′C † .                                      (2.42)

The inner product is then preserved and it is clear that the two formulations of the PW-formalism are
equivalent.

2.5.2    Observable reduction
Let us now clarify how the physical Hilbert space representation of gauge-invariant observables reduces
into C’s perspective. It was shown in [68] that relational observables gauge fix as follows for a ∈ AS :

                                       R′C (τ )OC
                                                τ
                                                  (a)R′C † (τ ) = Π|C a Π|C .                               (2.43)

Using Eqs. (2.41), (2.42) and (2.31), as well as r(O)M = M O for O ∈ AH
                                                                      kin , the left hand side becomes

                R′C (τ )OC
                         τ
                           (a)R′C † (τ ) = R′C (τ )OC
                                                    τ
                                                      (a)M † R†C (τ ) = R′C (τ )M † OC
                                                                                     τ
                                                                                       (a)R†C (τ )
                                                                                                            (2.44)
                                         = RC (τ )OC
                                                   τ
                                                     (a)R†C (τ ) ,

so that we have an equivalent reduction result in co-invariant and RAQ language. The gauge-invariant
algebra therefore reduces equivalently in both languages as

                        RC (τ ) r(Ainv )R†C (τ ) = Π|C AS|C Π|C = R′C (τ )Ainv R′C † (τ ),                  (2.45)

where AS|C is generated by a ∈ AS and US (t), t ∈ R. Note that Π|C ∈ AS|C because it is a bounded
function of HS .


                                                         18
    Returning to the original motivation by Page and Wootters to define a conditional probability
interpretation for physical states, it is now clear from Eqs. (2.38), (2.43) and (2.44) that the evolution
of a system observable a ∈ AS in relational Schrödinger states |ψ|C (τ )⟩ is equivalent to that of the
relational observable OC τ (a) (respectively O τ (a)) in the “timeless” physical state |Ψ) (respectively
                                                C
|Ψ′ )) corresponding to |ψ|C (τ )⟩ via Eqs. (2.35) and (2.40),
                         (Ψ|OC
                             τ
                               (a)|Ψ) = ⟨ψ|C (τ )|a|ψ|C (τ )⟩ = Ψ′ OC
                                                                    τ
                                                                      (a) Ψ′ .                      (2.46)
                                                                              

This can in particular be used to formulate consistent conditional probabilities that have an equivalent
gauge-invariant and gauge-fixed form [66, 68].
    For later, we note that even when C is ideal (and so Π|C = 1S ) and AS von Neumann, so that Ainv
is isomorphic to the crossed product AS ⋊US R, the intermediate expression Π|C AS|C Π|C in Eq. (2.45)
is not unitarily equivalent to the crossed product algebra. Since RC is unitary, this means that r is
not faithful for Ainv . Indeed, a standard ‘gauge-fixed’ form of the crossed product is generated by a
and bounded functions of H ′ − HS for some unbounded Hamiltonian H ′ (e.g., see [21, 24]), i.e. one of
an ideal clock. Such an H ′ is missing from the right hand side in Eq. (2.45), which already tells us
that an additional complementary ideal clock will be needed to render r faithful. This is related to a
puzzle discussed by CLPW in [21], and we will come back to this subtlety below.
   Since the reduction map is unitary, the relations in Eqs. (2.43) and (2.44) tell us that the represen-
tation of relational observables on physical states, OC
                                                      τ (a), always constitutes a unital ∗-homomorphism

from Π|C AS Π|C into r(Ainv ), regardless of whether C is ideal (see [66, 68] for further discussion). By
contrast, OCτ (a) only constitutes a homomorphism from A (and even Π A Π ) into the kinematical
                                                             S             |C S |C
gauge-invariant algebra Ainv when the clock C is ideal because otherwise the G-twirl does not preserve
products [66, 68]. In other words, relational observables only preserve algebraic structure on physical
states.
   In appendix A.3, we use the reduction result in Eqs. (2.43) and (2.44) to further show that relational
observables are complete on the physical Hilbert space. Specifically, we show that every bounded
operator on Hphys can be obtained from a bounded kinematical or system operator via the relational
observable construction in Eq. (2.12) and that this relational observable is also kinematically bounded.

2.6   QRF transformations: changing to a different clock
    A core output of the recent wave of QRF research is the formulation of a quantum frame covariance
of physical properties. This relies on transformations between different QRFs and their “internal
perspectives” on the physics. The key difference to classical frame transformations is that one is now
able to transform between reference frames that may be in relative superposition or entangled with
other systems and this leads to interesting physical consequences. Such transformations have appeared
in somewhat different contexts and formulations [59, 65–69, 71, 74–77, 80–82, 86, 114]. Here, we briefly
review the QRF transformations of the perspective-neutral approach [66–69, 71, 74–77], as it is the
one applicable to the present case of gauge systems with constraints. For our purposes, we restrict to
the special case of clock transformations [68–70] (with precursors [77, 114, 124, 136]) and refer to [66]
for general symmetry groups.
   The sought-after clock transformations are not related to the clock reorientations 1S ⊗ UC (τ ). The
latter change the orientation of the given temporal QRF C, i.e. the reading of the clock, and thus
the relation between the clock and evolving system. This is a physical transformation and changes
the state in the physical Hilbert space. Instead, we would now like to change to a different clock
subsystem and “jump into its new internal perspective”. This transformation will amount to a change
of description of any state in Hphys (respectively Hphys
                                                     ′   ), but not a change of state itself. Indeed, it
will take the form of a change of gauge.

                                                   19
   To this end, we will assume additional structure in the system S, namely that it contains at least
an additional clock subsystem. Thus, we replace C → C1 and S → SC2 and consider now

                 Hkin = HS ⊗ H1 ⊗ H2 ,                         with                  H = HS + H1 + H2 ,                   (2.47)

henceforth simplifying the notation by writing just i instead of Ci in subscripts. The argument in
App. A.2 entails that we can write the gauge-invariant algebra

                                           Ainv := (AS ⊗ B(H1 ) ⊗ B(H2 ))H                                                (2.48)

on Hkin equivalently as being generated by relational observables and reorientations relative to either
C1 or C2 (cf. Eq. (2.11))
                                     D                                                                     E
                                        τ1
                      Ainv =           OC 1
                                            (a), 1S ⊗ U1 (t) ⊗ 12 | a ∈ AS ⊗ B(H2 ), t ∈ R
                                     D                                                                     E
                                        τ2
                               =       OC 2
                                            (a), 1S ⊗ 11 ⊗ U2 (t) | a ∈ AS ⊗ B(H1 ), t ∈ R ,                              (2.49)

where relational observables are defined as before in Eq. (2.12) but now also include the ones describing
the two clocks relative to one another. Again, when AS is von Neumann, then so is Ainv , and
when AS is a Type III1 factor, then so is B(Hi ) ⊗ AS , i = 1, 2, in which case Ainv is also a factor
(cf. appendix A.2). In the special case of an ideal clock C1 , Ainv is the crossed product of AS ⊗ B(H2 )
by the translation group.
   We begin again in RAQ language, before translating the observation into the language of co-
invariants. The “quantum coordinate map” into the perspective of clock C1 when it reads τ1 becomes

                                              R′1 (τ1 ) = ⟨τ1 |1 ⊗ 12 ⊗ 1S .                                              (2.50)

It is a unitary R′1 (τ1 ) : Hphys
                             ′    → H|1 , where H|1 := Π|1 (HS ⊗ H2 ) ⊆ HS ⊗ H2 is the Hilbert space of
SC2 relative to clock C1 . It is the subspace of the kinematical Hilbert space factors H2 ⊗ HS consistent
with the constraint H and the corresponding projector is given via Eq. (2.33)
                                                           Z
                                       Π|1 := Π|C1 =             dt χ∗1 (t)US (t) ⊗ U2 (t),                               (2.51)
                                                             R

where χ1 (t) = ⟨t| 0⟩1 . When σ1 is just an interval σ1 = [ϵ1min , ϵ1max ], we have explicitly

                               Π|1 = Θ(ϵ1max + HS + H2 )Θ(−ϵ1min − HS − H2 ).                                             (2.52)

The reduction into C2 -perspective is defined analogously.
   The transformation from the perspective of C1 into that of C2 is thus given by [68]
                                                                  Z
                  ′
                V1→2 (τ1 , τ2 ) := R′2 (τ2 ) ◦ R′1 † (τ1 ) =           dt |t + τ1 ⟩1 ⊗ ⟨τ2 − t|2 ⊗ US (t).                (2.53)
                                                                   R

It is clear that |ψ|2 (τ2 )⟩ = V1→2
                                 ′  (τ1 , τ2 ) |ψ|1 (τ1 )⟩, where |ψ|i (τi )⟩ = R′i (τi ) |Ψ′ ) is the state of Cj S
relative to Ci , i =
                   ̸ j, which evolves in τi according to the Schrödinger equation with Hamiltonian
HS + Hj . The compositional form of the temporal QRF change is reminiscent of how one changes
between different coordinate systems on a manifold – they are “quantum coordinate changes”:
                                                           ′
                                                          Hphys
                               R′1 (τ1 )                                               R′2 (τ2 )
                                                                                                                          (2.54)

    H|1 = Π|1 (HS ⊗ H2 )                      ′
                                                                                                   H|2 = Π|2 (HS ⊗ H1 )
                                            V1→2 (τ1 ,τ2 ) = R′2 (τ2 )◦R′1 † (τ1 )


                                                                  20
In analogy to how a manifold is an intrinsic object independent of what coordinates we choose, we
can likewise view Hphys
                     ′   as an intrinsic state space encoding the internal physics independently of the
choice of QRF. Hphys (and similarly the algebra B(Hphys
                  ′                                   ′  )) is thus a QRF perspective-neutral structure,
encoding and linking all internal QRF perspectives. This provides this approach to QRF covariance
with its name. It can be argued that this covariance structure constitutes a quantum extension of
classical covariance structures akin to those underlying special covariance [67, Sec. II] and [66].
   From the preceding discussion in Sec. 2.5 it is clear that the same structure appears in co-invariant
language, where the QRF transformations now read

                  V1→2 (τ1 , τ2 ) = R2 (τ2 ) ◦ R†1 (τ1 ) = R′2 (τ2 )M † R†1 (τ1 ) = V1→2
                                                                                      ′
                                                                                         (τ1 , τ2 )                    (2.55)
                                                         (2.41)                        (2.42)

and yield the same diagram as Eq. (2.54) with all primes dropped.
      ′
    V1→2 is a controlled, hence nonlocal unitary. This can also be seen by its action on observables, e.g.
for a ∈ AS , we have [68]
   ′                                ′               †
 V1→2 (τ1 , τ2 )Π|1 (a ⊗ 12 ) Π|1 V1→2 (τ1 , τ2 )        = R′2 (τ2 ) OC
                                                                      τ1
                                                                        1
                                                                          (a ⊗ 12 )R′2 † (τ2 )                         (2.56)
                                                                                 Z
                                                                τ1                                                    †
                                                         = Π|2 OC 1
                                                                    (a) = Π|2          dt US1 (t) (a ⊗ |τ1 ⟩⟨τ1 |1 ) US1 (t).
                                                                                   R
           τ1
Note that OC 1
               (a) commutes with Π|2 as the latter is a function of H1 + H2 . Thus, when C1 is ideal
and so Π|1 = 1S2 , a local system operator relative to C1 transforms into a composite C1 S operator
relative to C2 . This is a reflection of subsystem relativity, which we will discuss in the next section,
and which is at the heart of all QRF relative physical properties. Thus, more generally
                                                                                †
                           R′2 (τ2 )AH    ′†
                                     SC1 R2 (τ2 ) = Π|2 ASC1 = R2 (τ2 )r(ASC1 )R2 (τ2 ) ,
                                                         H                H
                                                                                                                       (2.57)
                                H
where AH
       SC1 = (AS ⊗ B(H1 ) ⊗ 12 ) and an identity factor 12 has been implicitly dropped in Π|2 ASC1 .
                                                                                               H


    We noted above that the PW reduction map constitutes a gauge fixing. The clock frame transfor-
mation therefore takes the form of a change of gauge. This does not mean, however, that a choice of
clock frame is equivalent to a choice of gauge or that the QRF dependence of physical properties is a
gauge artifact. Indeed, we saw above that there also exists an equivalent manifestly gauge-invariant
manner to “jump” into a QRF perspective, namely to dress kinematical operators with the chosen clock
frame. In Sec. 2.7, we will see that these lead to distinct gauge-invariant algebras19 and that a QRF
transformation amounts to a change of tensor product structure on Hphys . Rather, the choice of QRF
is a choice of convention to split the kinematical degrees of freedom into redundant and non-redundant
ones. For a gauge fixing procedure this means a convention for which kinematical degrees of freedom
one may fix, however, not yet how to fix them; a choice of QRF thus corresponds to an entire family
of possible gauge fixings but it is not a gauge itself. This is linked to our discussion above that the
Schrödinger evolution is physical.

2.7    Subsystem relativity
   We started with an assumed tensor product structure (TPS) on the kinematical Hilbert space,
Hkin = HS ⊗ H1 ⊗ H2 . Given that this is the space of states that are distinguishable relative to
an external (possibly fictitious) frame, the TPS on it corresponds to an externally distinguishable


  19
    There also exists an equivalent gauge-invariant version of QRF transformations that acts on these algebras of
observables and transforms them into one another [66, 67] (see also [56, 58] for their formulation in classical gauge theory
and gravity). This is a manifestation of a certain equivalence between gauge-fixings and dressings. However, we will not
be using this version of QRF transformations in this work and hence do not review them here.


                                                             21
subsystem structure. But our internal physics happens on the space Hphys of internally distinguishable
states, and as we have seen this is a distinct Hilbert space that in the present case is also not a
subspace of Hkin ; it thus does not inherit the kinematical TPS. We are now interested in an internally
distinguishable subsystem structure and TPS on Hphys . Such a structure is crucial for defining a
gauge-invariant notion of entanglement and entropies, but, as we will see, it depends on the choice of
QRF and corresponds to its internal perspective [66, 67, 71, 86].
   This can be seen in two equivalent ways [67, Sec. III]. For later purpose, we will formulate everything
here in the co-invariant language; from the preceding sections it is clear that all following statements
take an equivalent form in RAQ language. Let us first consider the case that C1 , C2 are both ideal, so
that Π|1 and Π|2 are each equal to the identity. Since the “quantum coordinate maps” are unitary, the
diagram (2.54) tells us that each reduction map Ri (τi ), i = 1, 2, is nothing but a TPS on Hphys and,
because V1→2 is a nonlocal unitary, the change of clock amounts to a change of TPS on the physical
Hilbert space.20 In other words, an ideal internal QRF perspective is a TPS on Hphys .
   Suppose now that C1 , C2 are non-ideal with σi := σCi = [ϵimin , ϵimax ] so Πi ̸= 1Sj . We show in
appendix A.4 that the reduced Hilbert space in C1 -perspective of diagram (2.54) admits the following
decomposition
                                        −
                               H|1 = HS2  ⊕ (ΠS (HS ) ⊗ H2 ) ⊕ HS2+
                                                                     ,                          (2.58)
where ΠS is the projector onto the subspace of HS spanned by eigenstates with −ϵ1max − ϵ2min ≤
                         ±
ES ≤ −ϵ1min − ϵ2max and H2S are direct sums/integrals of tensor products between C2 and S subspaces
when σS := Spec(HS ) is discrete/continuous. (Later, HS will be a QFT modular Hamiltonian and
thus feature a continuous spectrum.) That is, for non-ideal clocks, Ri (τi ) defines instead a direct
sum/integral of TPSs on Hphys and the clock change amounts to a change of such a direct sum/integral
of TPSs.
   Second, the QRF relativity of the internal subsystem structure can also be seen at the gauge-
invariant, algebraic level. To this end, we can ask which system observables can be measured relative
to both clock frames if each clock has no operational access to the other clock degrees of freedom.
These reside in the intersection of the two gauge-invariant kinematical subalgebras, describing S and
the clock C1 or C2 , respectively,

                SC1 := (AS ⊗ B(H1 ) ⊗ 12 ) ,                        SC2 := (AS ⊗ 11 ⊗ B(H2 )) .
                                          H                                                  H
               AH                                                  AH                                                 (2.59)
                                              ′               ′
We have, using that AH = A ∩ H , where H                          ⊂ B(Hkin ) denotes the commutant of (bounded
functions of) the constraint,
                                                      H                 H
                           SC1 ∩ ASC2 = (ASC1 ∩ ASC2 ) = (AS ⊗ 11 ⊗ 12 ) .
                          AH                                                                                          (2.60)
                                  H


Thus, the algebra of observables accessible to both clock frames is equal to the algebra of gauge-invariant
observables that are internal to the system. The intuition behind this is simple [67]: AH       SC1 does not
contain reorientations of C2 but commutes with them and vice versa with C1 and C2 interchanged.
Hence, observables in the intersection must commute with reorientations of both clocks but cannot
include reorientations of either. This means that the intersection is given by relational observables
                                                                 τi
such that a in Eq. (2.12) already commutes with HS and so OC       i
                                                                     (a ⊗ 1j ) = a ⊗ 11 ⊗ 12 , i = 1, 2, i =
                                                                                                           ̸ j.
These are also the only observables that are purely S-local relative to both frames [67].


  20
                                                                                                               N
     More precisely, a TPS on an abstract Hilbert space H is an equivalence class of unitaries, U : H →            α
                                                                                                                     Hα , such
that U1 ∼ U2 if U2 U1−1 is a product of local unitaries ⊗α Uα (and possibly permutations of subsystem factors). Since
Ri (τi + t) = (Uj (t) ⊗ US (t)) Ri (τi ) via the equivalence of reorientations and subsystem evolution on Hphys , we have that
Ri (τi ) defines the same equivalence class (and so TPS on Hphys ) for all τi ∈ R. Hence, the TPS depends only on the
choice of QRF, but not on its orientation to which we might gauge fix.


                                                             22
    The two subalgebras in Eq. (2.59) are thus distinct. An extreme example is provided when AS
is a type III1 von Neumann algebra and HS is a modular Hamiltonian for it with an ergodic action,
a situation that will appear in perturbative quantum gravity (e.g. in de Sitter space [21, 90]) below.
Then the only S observables that commute with the constraint are c-numbers. In other words, in that
case, the two frames do not share any common QFT observables and we have

                                                  SC1 ∩ ASC2 = C1S12 .
                                                 AH                                                                  (2.61)
                                                         H



   Nevertheless, the two subalgebras (2.59) are isomorphic when C1 and C2 have identical spectra.
For example, when both clock are ideal, both algebras are isomorphic to the crossed product AS ⋊US R
and hence also isomorphic to one another. However, they are not isomorphic more generally. As noted
in Sec. 2.5.2, when the clock is ideal, relational observables constitute a homomorphism from the
system algebra AS into Ainv , while this is not true when the clock is non-ideal. Thus, for instance,
when C1 is ideal but C2 is not, the two subalgebras are not isomorphic.
   Moreover, note that [AH   SC1 , ASC2 ] ̸= 0 because the dressed S operators in one algebra do not
                                    H

commute with the dressed S operators in the other. Hence, even in the extreme case that the algebras
overlap trivially – as they sometimes do in QFT, Eq. (2.61) – the two gauge-invariant algebras
describing S relative to the two clocks do not define independent subsystems and acting with operators
from one algebra will affect the outcomes of measurements from the other.
   It is clear that these observations carry over to the representation of these algebras on the physical
Hilbert space, i.e.
                               r(AHSC1 ) ∩ r(ASC2 ) = r((AS ⊗ 11 ⊗ 12 ) ).                         (2.62)
                                              H                        H

It is in particular somewhat simpler to see that r(AH  SC1 ) and r(ASC2 ) are isomorphic only when C1
                                                                       H

and C2 have identical spectra. Owing to the unitarity of Ri , the relation in Eq. (2.45) applied to this
case tells us that
                                 r(AH SCi ) ≃ Π|i AS|i Π|i ,  i = 1, 2,                           (2.63)
where AS|i is generated by a ∈ AS and USj (t) with j =      ̸ i. Since AS|1 and AS|2 are isomorphic
and Π|i ∈ AS|i , we have that the physical representations r(AH  SC1 ) and r(ASC2 ) are isomorphic only
                                                                               H

provided the projectors Π|1 and Π|2 are identical functions of HS + H2 and HS + H1 , respectively.21
By Eq. (2.51) this means that the spectra of C1 , C2 coincide. Thus, the system (later the QFT degrees
of freedom) will appear differently relative to a fuzzy clock than it does to a sharp one.
    In the special case when the clock Cj is ideal and AS = B(HS ) is the full system algebra (hence a
Type I factor), we have r(AH SC1 C2 ) = Oi|j ∨ OS|j
                                                    22 with [O , O
                                                              i|j  S|j ] = 0, for either j = 1 or j = 2 and
                        τj
i ̸= j, where Oi|j = OCj (a) | a ∈ B(Hi ) ⊗ 1Sj is the algebra of relational observables on the physical
                                                                       τ
Hilbert space describing Ci relative to Cj , and similarly OS|j = OCjj (a) | a ∈ AS ⊗ 112 is the algebra
of relational observables on Hphys describing S relative to Cj . In this case, Oi|j and OS|j induce the
TPS Rj (τ ) associated with Cj on Hphys (e.g., see [67] for the finite-dimensional case). When Cj is
non-ideal, then Oi|j and OS|j do not close as algebras23 and typically do not commute [71].
   The fact that different QRFs associate different gauge-invariant subalgebras and Hilbert space tensor
factors with the same (kinematical) system S means that the notions of subsystem and subsystem
locality depend on the choice of QRF and with it essentially all physical properties that derive from a


  21
     Otherwise, suppose Π|1 = f (HS + H2 ) and Π|2 = g(HS + H1 ) for f, g distinct. Then the projector I − f ∈ AS|i maps
to zero in one representation but not the other, i.e. Π|1 (1S2 − f (HS + H2 ))Π|1 = 0, but Π|2 (1S1 − f (HS + H1 ))Π|2 ̸= 0.
  22
       A1 ∨ A2 denotes the smallest algebra containing both A1 and A2 .
  23
       For OS|j this can be seen from Eq. (2.63), by noting that Π|j AS Π|j is not closed under products because Π|j ∈
                                                                                                                     / AS .


                                                             23
subsystem partition. For example, in quantum mechanics it was shown that not only entanglement
and superpositions (originally observed in [65]), but also entropies, interactions, and thermodynamical
properties depend on the choice of QRF [67]; in particular, subsystem thermality and temperature
are affected by QRF changes in a way that is independent of classical frame changes in quantum
field theory, which lead to phenomena such as the Unruh effect. Subsystem relativity can further be
understood as a generalisation of the relativity of simultaneity in special relativity [67]; much like
the latter explains the a priori counter-intuitive phenomena of special relativity, so too is subsystem
relativity the source of the novel QRF-dependent physics. Our observation in Sec. 6 (expanding on
[1]) that entanglement entropy associated with gravitational subregions is observer-dependent is a
manifestation and (perturbative) quantum gravity extension of this.

2.8       Kinematical vs. physical von Neumanness
   Let us assume again that AS is a von Neumann algebra. We noted before that then so are both
ASCi , i = 1, 2, and AH
  H
                      SC1 C2 . This statement refers to the gauge-invariant kinematical level, i.e. the
closure of the algebra is defined in terms of the structure of Hkin . What about the representations of
       24

these algebras on the physical Hilbert space Hphys , which is not a subspace of Hkin and so closure will
be defined differently? To answer this question, we will here again invoke the setting of co-invariants
for later purpose, but it is clear that the conclusions are equivalent in RAQ language. We will now
argue that, while r(AH SCi ) remains a von Neumann algebra, this is not necessarily true for r(ASC1 C2 )
                                                                                                 H

when AS is a Type III1 factor. In other words, for the physical von Neumanness of the observable
algebras under consideration it is crucial that there is a (kinematically) complementary clock on which
this algebra has trivial support. Indeed, later the system S will contain many more clocks.
   To see that r(AHSC1 ) (and similarly r(ASC2 )) remains von Neumann, we can invoke Eq. (2.57) which
                                           H

entails that reduction into the complementary clock C2 ’s perspective gives
                                                             †
                                           R2 (τ2 ) r(AH
                                                       SC1 )R2 (τ2 ) = Π|2 ASC1
                                                                            H
                                                                                                                  (2.64)
with Π|2 and AH  SC1 commuting. Note that Π|2 is only contained in ASC1 when HS generates inner
                                                                          H

automorphisms of it; otherwise Π|2 ASC1 is not a subalgebra of ASC1 . However, the right-hand side is
                                      H                             H

clearly a subalgebra of B(H|2 ) and since this constitutes a ∗-homomorphism π : AH  SC1 → B(H|2 ) it is a
representation of ASC1 on H|2 . R2 is unitary and so our physical representation is isomorphic to it,
                     H

    SC1 ) ≃ Π|2 ASC1 . But we also have that Π|2 ASC1 is (ultra-)weakly closed in B(H|2 ).
r(AH             H                                H                                        25 Indeed, since

AHSC1 is a von Neumann algebra, it is (ultra-)weakly closed on HS ⊗ H1 , as well as on any subspace
that it leaves invariant, like H|2 = Π|2 (HS ⊗ H1 ). Hence, Π|2 AH  SC1 is a von Neumann algebra and
therefore also r(AHSC1 ).
   We conclude that r is an ultraweakly continuous representation of AH   SC1 (and similarly ASC2 ) on
                                                                                                 H

the physical Hilbert space. The projector Π|2 on the right hand side of Eq. (2.64) might at first suggest
that this representation may not be faithful26 when C2 is non-ideal, so that the projector is non-trivial.
However, it turns out that every non-trivial ultraweakly continuous representation of a von Neumann
factor is faithful [137, Lecture 22, Proposition 3].
   In the remainder of this work, we shall be interested in the case when AS is a Type III1 von


  24
       Thanks to the bicommutant theorem, this can be any of the bicommutant, weak or strong closure.
  25
     Let ai ∈ A ⊂ B(H) be a net of operators. It converges weakly to the limit operator a ∈ B(H) if the matrix elements
⟨ϕ| ai |ψ⟩ → ⟨ϕ| a |ψ⟩ converge for all ϕ ∈ H∗ and ψ ∈ H. A is weakly closed in B(H) if it contains the limit operator of
every net of operators in A that converges in B(H). It is ultraweakly closed if tensoring in an identity factor A → A ⊗ 1
on an additional infinite dimensional (separable) Hilbert space does not change these convergence and closure properties.
  26
       The representation is faithful when its kernel is {0}.


                                                                24
Neumann factor, associated with the quantum field and graviton observables inside a gravitational
subregion, and when HS generates modular flow. We noted before that in this case both AHSCi , i = 1, 2,
are Type II factors. Thus, the physical representation r(ASC1 ) (and similarly r(ASC2 )) is faithful
                                                           H                        H

regardless of whether the complementary clock is ideal or non-ideal, and in particular it remains a
factor.
   Let us now explain why the physical representation r of AH    SC1 C2 fails to be von Neumann when HS
acts ergodically on AS and its commutant AS on HS (as for the Type III1 static patch algebras in de
                                               ′

Sitter space [21, 90]). The full commutant (AH   SC1 C2 ) in B(Hkin ) is generated by a ∈ AS and bounded
                                                         ′                             ′     ′

functions of the constraint H. Only the latter are gauge invariant because the ergodic action of HS
means that only c-numbers from A′S commute with the constraint. The physical representation r of
the gauge-invariant component27 of (AH  SC1 C2 ) thus coincides with the identity factor C1. The double
                                                 ′

commutant on the physical Hilbert space then returns the full Type I factor r(AH        SC1 C2 ) = B(Hphys ).
                                                                                                ′′

That is, r(AH SC1 C2 ) ⊊ r(ASC1 C2 ) is not closed under the bicommutant and therefore not a von
                             H      ′′

Neumann algebra.
   This observation links with challenges exhibited by CLPW in [21, Sec. 4.3] when discussing a single
observer with a clock in de Sitter space. We will return to this topic in Sec. 4.5.


3         Realisation in perturbative quantum gravity: PW = CLPW
   The quick reader mainly interested in our derivations of density operators and entropies for
arbitrarily many observers/clock QRFs can skip to Sec. 4.
   Thus far we have not been specific about the system S. It could have been another mechanical
system or it could in fact have been a quantum field subsystem. We will now become more concrete
and inquire under which conditions we can realise Hamiltonian constraints of the type in Eq. (2.47)

                                                    H = HS + H1 + H2                                            (3.1)

in quantum gravity. (Below we will generalise this to an arbitrary number of clocks.) While such
constraints and clocks arise naturally in minisuperspace, e.g. see [138–140],28 we are here after the
more interesting case when S is a QFT encoding gravitons, as well as possibly several species of matter
degrees of freedom. Specifically, we are interested in scenarios in which HS is a modular Hamiltonian
and a type transition of the S algebra occurs along with an intrinsic UV-regularisation of entanglement
entropies. In this regard, we have to clarify suitable conditions under which
 (a) it is legitimate to consider only a single constraint, where the gauge diffeomorphism group of
     gravity is infinite-dimensional, and
 (b) modular flow aligns with a temporal spacetime diffeomorphism.
This will thus be a hybrid scenario of quantum mechanical clock QRFs and a field-theoretic system.
For a full account of the bulk diffeomorphism group, field-theoretic frames are needed [56, 57, 115].

3.1         Subregions and constraints in perturbative quantum gravity
   The fact that there are no interactions between the clocks and S in Eq. (3.1) already suggests
that, in a gravitational setting, we must be ignoring backreaction and thus considering a perturbative


                              ′                                                                                      ′
    By this we mean (AH
    27                                   H                                                                   H
                      SC1 C2 ) ∧ B(Hkin ) , the largest gauge invariant algebra whose elements are in both (ASC1 C2 )
             H
and B(Hkin )
    28
         For the use of clock QRFs in that case, see for example [69, 114, 124].


                                                               25
regime. The background spacetime will also permit us to associate the system S with the field degrees
of freedom inside some subregion defined relative to that background structure in the spirit of the
algebraic approach [10, 141] (though see [31] for a background-independent proposal).
    In the remainder of this work, we thus consider quantum gravity around a background in the κ → 0
                  √
limit, where κ = 32πGN . Accordingly, we shall be mostly interested in the degrees of freedom of
the linearised theory, though, as we explain below, the crossed product generating constraints are of
second-order in κ [24, 30, 40, 89]. This background can be a vacuum spacetime, or one sourced by
matter, and the gravity theory may be general relativity or some more general gravity theory [40].
For the moment, we assume that this background possesses a Killing horizon as this is the case when
it is known that the modular flow of a KMS state of the QFT has a geometric interpretation as a
spacetime diffeomorphism, addressing (b) above, namely the one corresponding to the boost Killing
vector field generating the horizon [10, 141–144]. We comment on more general proposals below.
   In this background, we consider two subregions U and U ′ that are causal complements of one
another. For example, in [21], U, U ′ are two complementary static patches in de Sitter space or the left
and right exterior region in a maximally extended asymptotically flat Schwarzschild spacetime. In [30]
this was extended to several other types of black hole spacetimes and in [24] it was proposed that U
could be a general subregion in a generic spacetime.
    We denote the QFT Hilbert space of the global spacetime encoding gravitons and matter degrees of
freedom with HS and identify the algebra AU ⊂ B(HS ) generated by all the bounded QFT operators
with exclusive support in U and invariant under linearised bulk diffeomorphisms, as well as any matter
gauge symmetry, with the system algebra, i.e.

                                                   AS = AU .                                        (3.2)

At leading order in κ, only the graviton field will transform non-trivially under spacetime diffeomor-
phisms if the background is a vacuum one [24, 40]. In that case, one can extract the gauge-invariant
graviton data via standard methods, such as transverse-traceless modes. When the background is
sourced by a non-trivial matter content, typically both matter and gravitons will transform non-trivially
under linearised diffeomorphisms [40], and gauge-invariant observables can in this case be formulated
using dressing methods such as in [145–148]. In line with the general expectation for asymptotically
scale invariant quantum field theories, we shall henceforth assume that AS is a Type III1 von Neumann
factor [141, 149–152]. Hence, its commutant A′S is also a Type III1 factor and Haag duality [10,
141] tells us that we can identify it with the corresponding algebra AU ′ associated with the causal
complement U ′ .
   So far we have described the linearised theory in κ. In order to obtain the modular crossed product
algebra, we in fact have to go one order higher because on-shell of the background equations of motion,
the first-order constraint associated with any Killing field is identically a boundary term
                                                       Z            Z
                                                            (1)            (1)
                                    C   (1)
                                              [κξ] =       Cκξ =          Bκξ ,                     (3.3)
                                                       Σ            ∂Σ

        (1)                                                                        (1)
where Cκξ is the first-order constraint current associated with Killing field ξ, Bκξ is some boundary
term (the first-order ADM Hamiltonian in general relativity) and Σ is a global Cauchy slice [40]
(see also [48, 153] for the case of pure vacuum general relativity). In particular, for spatially closed
spacetimes, C (1) [κξ] vanishes identically.
   The constraint associated with ξ only has a non-trivial bulk contribution at second order in κ
                                                                Z
                                                                         (2)
                                        C (2) [κξ] = Hξ −               Bκξ ,                       (3.4)
                                                                ∂Σ


                                                           26
                                                                                    I+


                                                                                            i0
                                                                                Σ

                                                                                    I−


                  Figure 3.1: Depicted is the maximally extended Schwarzschild spacetime
                  together with its time Killing flow lines. The Killing boost Hamiltonian Hξ
                  simultaneously maps the Cauchy slice Σ forwards in time in the right region
                  and backwards in time in the left region. The role of the clocks can here
                  be played by the ADM Hamiltonian defined the right and left asymptotic
                               (2)
                  boundary HADM = HR − HL with the relative minus sign accounting for the
                  opposite directions of the Killing vector ξ in both regions.


where (on-shell of the first-order equations of motion and boundary conditions) Hξ is given by the
Killing boost Hamiltonian                      Z
                                                Hξ =         (ϵ0 )µ Tµν ξ ν ,                                      (3.5)
                                                         Σ
with ϵ0 the volume form of the background metric g0 and Tµν a stress-energy tensor of all fields,
including gravitons [40]. The crux is that βHξ for some β ≥ 0 is the modular Hamiltonian associated
with some global QFT state |ψ⟩S ∈ HS that is cyclic and separating for AS = AU [10, 141–144], and
we identify it as the system Hamiltonian:

                                                      HS = Hξ .                                                    (3.6)

The boundary piece can be interpreted as the second-order ADM Hamiltonian [27, 30, 40],
                                                               Z
                                                   (2)                  (2)
                                                 HADM =                Bκξ ,                                       (3.7)
                                                                  ∂Σ

and it is given by a sum of Hamiltonians, one for each disconnected piece of the asymptotic boundary.
For example, in the maximally extended asymptotically flat Schwarzschild spacetime, there is a left
                                        (2)
and a right asymptotic boundary and HADM = HR − HL [21], so that the constraint reads

                                            C (2) [κξ] = HS − HR + HL                                              (3.8)

and reproduces the form Eq. (3.1) with the left and right ADM Hamiltonians assuming the role of
the clock Hamiltonians. The relative minus sign between HR and HL traces back to the fact that the
Killing flow generated by the boost field ξ is future-pointing in the right region and past-directed in
the left one (see Fig. 3.1). It is important that HR,L is linear in the second-order metric perturbations
[30, 40], which means that its spectrum is unbounded in both directions and so HL , HR correspond to
ideal clock QRFs on the boundary.29
   When the spacetime is spatially closed, such as de Sitter space, on the other hand, no intrinsic
gravitational ADM boundary clocks are present and the second-order constraint would just be given


  29
     More precisely, this requires a regularisation of the ADM Hamiltonians, HR,L → HR,L − M0 to account for the
diverging black hole mass M0 as GN → 0. HR,L are not necessarily non-degenerate on the Hilbert space of second-order
fluctuation variables. However, one can refactorise the Hilbert space of the second-order fluctuations such that HR,L act
only on a L2 (R) factor of it, thereby turning it into an ideal clock Hamiltonian. See [21, Sec. 5] for discussion.


                                                             27
                                                                   r=0
                                                           Σ




               Figure 3.2: The static patch of de Sitter space depicted with its Killing flow
               lines. The killing flow generated by Hξ moves the cauchy slice Σ forwards in
               time in the right patch but backwards in time in its complement, the left patch.
               The clocks measuring the boost time would be H1 in the right patch and H2
               in the left patch respectively. One can think of them being localised along
               the r = 0 worldlines. The backwards evolution in the complement leads to a
               relative minus sign between the two clock Hamiltonians.


by H = HS . It turns out that the modular flow generated by HS acts ergodically on AU = AS [21, 90]
and this means that the content of U that is invariant under this constraint is trivial

                                                  S = C.
                                                 AH                                                  (3.9)

To remedy this issue, CLPW introduced an observer equipped with a quantum clock in each of the two
complementary static patches U, U ′ such that each timelike worldline connects the past with the future
tip of the respective static patch [21]. This shifts the stress-energy tensor in Eq. (3.5) by the clock
contributions, Hξ → Hξ + H1 − H2 , where i = 1, 2 labels the clock Hamiltonians in the two patches.
In this case, there is no reason for Hi to be unbounded or non-degenerate and so the clocks need not
be ideal. When the worldlines coincide with Killing flow lines generated by the cosmological horizon
boost vector field, these clocks measure that boost time and the relative minus sign between the clock
Hamiltonians again accounts for the relative orientation between the direction of time evolution in the
two patches [21, 24, 31, 40] (see Figure 3.2). This once more reproduces a Hamiltonian constraint of
the form Eq. (3.1) and in this case one does obtain non-trivial boost-invariant algebras for both U, U ′
from the crossed product construction. Clearly, the observers’ clocks are QRFs of exactly the type we
described in Sec. 2.
   Operationally, we can assume that each observer can probe the observables in the vicinity of their
worldline. The timelike tube theorem [154–158] asserts that they can then also access the entire algebra
associated with the ‘timelike envelope’ of their wordline. This is the causal region defined by all the
events that can be reached by deforming the original worldline, while keeping its endpoints fixed
and preserving the timelike nature of the worldline. For an observer in de Sitter space, this envelope
will agree with its entire static patch. The timelike tube theorem thereby supports an operational
interpretation of the entropies that will be associated with such regions.
   Let us now come to two related questions, namely (a) above and:
 (c) why should one impose second-order constraints, Eqs. (3.1) and (3.4), when we are taking the
     κ → 0 limit and are thus interested in the linear-order theory?
We have discussed these questions and answer options at length in [40] and we refer to that work for
details. In a nutshell, there is an essentially unambiguous answer for spatially closed spacetimes in
general relativity with isometries: a linearised solution is a valid approximation to an exact solution if


                                                     28
and only if all second-order Killing symmetry generators, called Taub charges [159, 160], vanish [48,
49, 161]. The boost constraint happens to be one of those and crucially there is just a finite number
of them, one for each independent Killing field. When the first-order in κ fields do not satisfy these
constraints, the linearised solution cannot be integrated to an exact one. However, we can safely ignore
all other infinitely many second-order diffeomorphism constraints as far as a consistent embedding of
the linearised theory into the full non-linear theory is concerned. The constraints Eqs. (3.1) and (3.5)
are thus to be understood as one of a finite number of necessary and sufficient stability conditions
for perturbation theory to avoid spurious solutions. This is the output of the subject of linearisation
instabilities [41–43, 46, 47, 50, 162]. While these are classical results, there are strong arguments
for also imposing these constraints as stability conditions in the quantum theory [44, 45, 51–53, 89].
Furthermore, the original instability theorems pertain to general relativity, however, it appears likely
that similarly strong results hold in arbitrary generally covariant theories in spatially closed spacetimes
[40]. Finally, the isometries are now typically broken down by the presence of the observers to a form
R × G, for some compact group G [21], where R corresponds to the boost translations. Given the
compactness of G and the direct product structure, expanding the QRFs to account for G [66] will
however not affect the crossed product type transition or the discussion qualitatively otherwise. In
that sense, it is legitimate to ignore them here.30
    In the absence of isometries or the presence of boundaries (with interesting boundary conditions),
no instabilities arise and no second-order constraint is necessary in order to ensure consistency of the
first-order theory [40, 48, 49, 161, 164, 165]. One must thus argue differently why one would still want
to consider second-order constraints of the form Eq. (3.1) and why considering only a single constraint
or finite number of them, as done in practice, is legitimate. As we argue in [40], this will depend
on whether one is also interested in certain second-order observables, such as in [27, 29, 30], though
strictly speaking this case still stands on arguably less robust grounds than the spatially compact one
with isometries.
    It is also not known in general under which conditions modular flow of a QFT algebra admits a
geometric interpretation. However, there is a ‘geometric modular flow conjecture’ asserting that the
diffeomorphism generated by a vector field that appears boost-like near the boundary of a general
subregion in a spacetime with or without isometries will agree infinitesimally with the modular flow of
some KMS state and so can be used for building crossed products [24, 144].
    In the sequel, we shall simply work with constraints of the form Eq. (3.1), without further specifying
whether we work in a spacetime with or without boundary and whether or not an exact boost Killing
field exists. We note the various levels of justification for considering such constraints mentioned above
(with an essentially unambiguous justification for spatially closed spacetimes with boost isometries).
Henceforth, we also assume that HS is a modular Hamiltonian, while Hi could thus be an internal or
ADM boundary clock Hamiltonian, depending on the situation.

3.2    PW = CLPW
    Let us now clarify more precisely that what CLPW [21] and follow-up works such as JSS [24]
call an observer is precisely a temporal QRF according to the perspective-neutral approach reviewed
in the previous section. We will briefly demonstrate that the description of constrained states and
observables used in these works is equivalent to the (expanded form of the) Page-Wootters (PW)
formalism underlying that approach, as reviewed in Sec. 2.5. This is the basis for the informal slogan


  30
    In the operational approach to QRFs, which does not impose constraints on states, these isometries have been
encompassed in the crossed products of [54]; such crossed products were also considered in [163]. Encompassing them in
an approach that does impose constraints on states also, as likely appropriate in gravity, would build upon [66].


                                                         29
                              Hext                                              Aext
                                                                                 SC
                                        Q                                                Q
                H ext =0                      Πi                   H ext =0               i
                                                                                              Πi
                                          i


                                                               ext
              ext
             Hphys                             Hkin          AH
                                                              SC                               ASC

                                                                                         H=0
                                                                   Q
                  Q
                         Πi             H=0                               Πi
                     i                                                i

                              Hphys                                             AH
                                                                                 SC

                                                                                   r


                                                                                  SC )
                                                                               r(AH

               Figure 3.3: Commutative diagram showing two orders in which constraints
               may be imposed. CLPW [21] and JSS [24] move counterclockwise from the top,
               imposing non-idealness (bounded energy) of the clocks only after the constraint
               is implemented. Our approach starts with the kinematical Hilbert space Hkin ,
               where clocks already have the final restriction on their energy spectra in place,
               and imposes the constraint on this. This diagram shows a comparison at the
               gauge invariant level, culminating on the physical Hilbert space. An analogous
               diagram instead implements the gauge constraint via gauge fixing, for instance
               culminating in the reduced perspective of frame C2 , as we do in the main text
               below. The diagram on the right shows the similar two orders of imposing the
               constraints on the algebras.


in the title of this section. We will build upon this observation in subsequent sections to generalise the
construction to arbitrarily many observers/QRFs.

3.2.1   Map to coinvariant representation is Page-Wootters reduction
In both [21, 24] the clocks are first treated as ideal, and only after deriving the relevant density
operators are projectors included to enforce the energy bounds of the observer Hamiltonian (in their
case, reducing the spectra from the full real line to values on a half-line). The perspective-neutral
approach reviewed in Sec. 2, by contrast, directly begins with a kinematical Hilbert space on which
the clock frames already have their final energy restrictions and thus may already be non-ideal (having
limited spectral ranges), and then implements the constraint by mapping states and operators to the
physical Hilbert space and/or gauge-fixed ‘reduced’ Hilbert spaces corresponding to the internal frame
perspectives. Relative to us, we therefore say that [21, 24] consider an ‘extended’ kinematical Hilbert
space and constraint operator to start with, which we indicate with the label ‘ext’:

                                      Hext := HS ⊗ L2 (R)1 ⊗ L2 (R)2 ,                               (3.10)

                                        H ext := HS + H1ext − H2ext .                                (3.11)

The relative minus sign again accounts for the different relative direction of time evolution in U, U ′ ,
assuming clock C2 lives in U ′ . H1ext and H2ext are therefore unbounded ideal clock frame Hamiltonians.
The final output of both routes coincides, as we now explain, see Fig. 3.3.
   The relation to our Hamiltonians is given by

                                                   Hi = Πi Hiext                                     (3.12)


                                                        30
with projector onto the ultimately permitted energy intervals of clock Ci
                                                                  i,α
                                      Πi =       Θ(ϵi,α
                                                    max − Hi )Θ(−ϵmin + Hi ) ,                      (3.13)
                                             X

                                             α

where α sums over the different possible non-overlapping intervals (in [21] only a single interval was
used). Similarly, we have
                               Hkin = Π1 Π2 (Hext ) = HS ⊗ H1 ⊗ H2                               (3.14)
                                        i,α
with Hi =       α L (σi ), where σi = [ϵmin , ϵmax ], and for the clock states
                   2 α            α            i,α
            L


                                                     |t⟩i = Πi |t⟩ext
                                                                  i   .                             (3.15)

Note that the projection does not affect the covariance properties in Eq. (2.2), but is responsible for
the clock state fuzziness in Eqs. (2.6) and (2.7).
    In the case of ideal frames, the Hilbert space of coinvariants, as discussed in [21, Sec. 4.2] is
isomorphic to a simple tensor product of the QFT Hilbert space and one frame factor, say that of clock
C1 ; it thus removes clock C2 in the complementary patch U ′ . This is implemented via a certain T
map from (extended) kinematical states to a representation of coinvariants. Let us directly generalise
it to non-ideal clocks and show that it is equivalent to Page-Wootters reduction. The map is

                                              T2 : Hkin −→ HS ⊗ H1 ,                                (3.16)

reading in our notation and conventions [21, Eq. (4.10)]
                                                 Z
                                      T2 |ψ⟩ =        dt e−it(HS +H1 ) |ψ(t)⟩ ,                     (3.17)
                                                  R

where |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin and |ψ(t)⟩ = (⟨t|2 ⊗ 1S1 ) |ψ⟩. Clearly, using the clock covariance in Eq. (2.2)

                              T2 |ψ⟩ = R′2 (0) Πphys |ψ⟩ = R2 (0)M |ψ⟩ ,                            (3.18)
                                                                 (2.41)

where Πphys is the coherent group averaging map Eq. (2.17) (updated in the obvious way to accommo-
date two clocks) and R′2 (0) is the Page-Wootters reduction map as in Eq. (2.50), however, for clock C2
reading τ2 = 0. The ideal case of CLPW is recovered by setting Πi = 1i . Hence, the T map from the
(extended) kinematical Hilbert space to a coinvariant representation invoked by CLPW [21, Eq. (4.10)]
is equivalent to first going perspective-neutral via group averaging (or M ) and then “jumping into the
clock C2 ’s perspective when it reads τ2 = 0” via a Page-Wootters reduction.
   Written this way, it is clear that the action of T2 implements the constraint Eq. (3.1) in the form
H = HS + H1 − H2 . Nevertheless, it is somewhat instructive to double check that this also holds for
non-ideal clocks,
                                    T2 H |ψ⟩ = 0 ,     ∀ |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin ,                            (3.19)
which we briefly do in App. B. Hence,

                           T2 H2 |ψ⟩ = T2 (HS + H1 ) |ψ⟩ = (HS + H1 )T2 |ψ⟩ .                       (3.20)

Now Π2 = 1 on Hkin . However, by Eq. (3.20), this turns into a non-trivial projector for the internal
frame perspective

                                             T2 Π2 |ψ⟩ = Π|2 T2 |ψ⟩ ,                               (3.21)

where we recover Eqs. (2.51) and (2.52) (with the appropriate minus signs for H = HS + H1 − H2 )
                                                            2,α
                          Π|2 =       Θ(ϵ2,α
                                         max − HS − H1 )Θ(−ϵmin + HS + H1 ) .                       (3.22)
                                  X

                                  α


                                                            31
In other words, we recover the reduced Hilbert space in C2 -perspective of Sec. 2.6

                        H|2 ≡ T2 (Hkin ) = R2 (τ ) (Hphys ) = Π|2 (HS ⊗ H1 ) ,                       (3.23)

i.e. a subspace of HS ⊗ H1 when C2 is non-ideal and so Π|2 is a non-trivial projector. By contrast,
when C2 is ideal, Π|2 = 1S1 , and we recover the initial result of [21, Sec. 4.2].
   In particular, had we started like CLPW with Hext , first implemented the constraint H ext via T2ext
(defined in the obvious way) and then imposed the restrictions Πi on the clock energy spectra, we
would find in place of Eq. (3.21)

                                  T2ext Π1 Π2 |ψ⟩ext = Π1 Π|2 T2ext |ψ⟩ext ,                         (3.24)

where Πi is now a non-trivial projector on Hext . However, thanks to Eq. (3.15),

                                        T2ext Π1 Π2 |ψ⟩ext = T2 |ψ⟩ ,                                (3.25)

with |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin , and so it is clear that the two routes in Fig. 3.3 give the same end result. Thus, CLPW’s
and JSS’s observers are nothing but clock QRFs according to the perspective-neutral formalism.

3.2.2     Reduction of observable algebras
                                                                                                    H
Let us briefly consider the reduction of the crossed observable algebras AH
                                                                          SC1 = (AS ⊗ B(H1 ) ⊗ 12 )
                                   H
and AH S ′ C2 := (AS ⊗ 11 ⊗ B(H2 ))  = (AH SC1 ) , corresponding to U and U , respectively, which are
                   ′                            ′                           ′

commutants within Akin , and check that the procedure by CLPW agrees with the procedure of the
                        H

perspective-neutral formalism. To determine the representation on the space of coinvariants, CLPW
set [21, Sec. 4.2]
                                        AT2 |ψ⟩ := T2 AH kin |ψ⟩ ,                              (3.26)
which we have adapted to our conventions and notation and extended to clocks that are not necessarily
ideal. Using Eq. (2.25), we thus have

                            AT2 |ψ⟩ = R2 (0)M AH
                                               kin |ψ⟩ = R2 (0)r(Akin ) |ψ)
                                                                  H

                                                       †
                                                                                                     (3.27)
                                      = R2 (0)r(AH
                                                 kin )R2 (0)R2 (0) |ψ) ,

so that
                                                            †
                                         A = R2 (0)r(AH
                                                      kin )R2 (0)                                    (3.28)
agrees with the Page-Wootters reduced algebras as in [68, Thm. 3]. Hence, by Eqs. (2.64):
                                                       †
                             ASC1 |2 := R2 (0)r(AH
                                                 SC1 )R2 (0)
                                      = Π|2 AH
                                             SC1                                                     (3.29)
                                             D                                   E′′
                                             τ1
                                      = Π|2 OC 1
                                                 (a), eisH1 a ∈ AS , s ∈ R

and by Eq. (2.57):
                                                          †
                          AS ′ C2 |2 := R2 (0)r(AH
                                                 S ′ C2 )R2 (0)
                                         D                                     E′′                   (3.30)
                                   = Π|2 a′ , eis(HS +H1 ) a′ ∈ A′S , s ∈ R          Π|2 .

Both algebras now act on the reduced space in C2 -perspective H|2 . From the arguments in App. A.2
and Sec. 2.8 it follows that both ASC1 |2 and AS ′ C2 |2 are Type II von Neumann factors; they are of
Type II1 if the respective clock has an energy bound from below, otherwise they are Type II∞ , see


                                                      32
[21] and Sec. 4. Furthermore, Haag duality (including the clocks) is preserved by reduction: on H|2 we
have
                                         ASC1 |2 = (AS ′ C2 |2 )′                                (3.31)
                                                                                           ′′
because the commutant of AH  SC1 on HS ⊗ H1 is a , e
                                                   ′ is(HS +H1 ) a′ ∈ A′ , s ∈ R
                                                                       S           and these commutant
relations are preserved by projection with Π|2 , yielding H|2 via Eq. (3.23) [166, EP7, p. 21].
   Thanks to Eqs. (3.24) and (3.25) it can be easily checked that the reduced algebras ASC1 |2 and
AS ′ C2 |2 coincide with the reduced algebras in CLPW upon implementing the clock energy restrictions
[21, Sec. 4.2].31
   We will now move on to generalise the construction by CLPW in [21] and JSS in [24] to arbitrarily
many observers with clocks using the perspective-neutral framework. We will later demonstrate in
Sec. 4.4 how to recover the density operators and entropies obtained in these references from our more
general formalism.


4        Subregion density operators with non-degenerate clocks
   Let us now consider a system consisting of quantum fields living in a Hilbert space HS , and some
arbitrary number n ∈ N of observers carrying clocks Ci , i = 1, . . . , n, each with non-degenerate
continuous spectra σi ⊂ R, and so Hilbert spaces Hi = L2 (σi ). We focus initially on the case where
the clocks are non-degenerate. Thus the total kinematical Hilbert space is
                                                               n
                                               Hkin = HS ⊗                                                       (4.1)
                                                               O
                                                                     Hi .
                                                               i=1

From here onward, we will now mostly invoke the language of co-invariants when describing constrained
states and observables, but, as described in Sec. 2, using RAQ would lead to an equivalent formulation.
   We will assume in this section that all the observers have access to field observables in some fixed
spacetime subregion U or its complement U ′ . Heuristically, one may imagine that the observers are
travelling along some worldlines in U or U ′ , and that they are somehow able to measure the fields in
the vicinities of their worldlines. The timelike tube theorem [154, 157, 158, 167] is then what permits
them to measure the fields in the rest of U or U ′ (under certain conditions), as briefly mentioned in
Subsec. 3.1.
   Each observer will also be assumed to have some amount of access to the degrees of freedom of the
clocks of the other observers. At the present level of abstraction, exactly how much access is essentially
just an operational specification. But we can use physical and heuristic principles to motivate this
specification (although note that the following is non-rigorous and should be taken with a grain of
salt). Indeed, suppose we continue to use the picture of observers travelling along worldlines. If an
observer Alice can act with the fields in the vicinity of another observer Bob’s worldline (invoking the
timelike tube theorem), then she also ought to be able to act on Bob with his Hamiltonian – because
the local gravitational constraints allow us to rewrite this Hamiltonian as a field operator supported in
Bob’s neighborhood. Also, Alice ought to be able to measure time differences of Bob’s clock – because
such time differences can be written in terms of the metric proper time along his worldline (again
ultimately due to the gravitational constraints). At the kinematical level, we can just allow her to
measure the absolute time of his clock, which will reduce to time differences after imposing gauge
invariance. So, Alice can act with all operators on Bob’s clock’s Hilbert space. More generally, we will


    31
    In fact, CLPW perform another unitary conjugation in C2 -perspective to put ASC1 |2 into a standard crossed product
form, a step we refrain from here.


                                                          33
assume each observer can act with the full set of operators on some subset R of the available clocks
(including their own).32 Despite the heuristic reasoning given here, in the interest of generality we will
not make any assumptions about whether the clocks in R are located inside or outside U.
    We assume that there is a gauge constraint of the form H = HS + ni=1 Hi , where HS is the generator
                                                                                  P

of some diffeomorphism acting on the fields and preserving U and U ′ , and Hi is the Hamiltonian of
clock Ci . Overall H should be understood as the generator of the diffeomorphism acting on the fields
and the clocks simultaneously. While HS throughout Sect. 2 could have been arbitrary, in particular
here we will take it to be the generator of a boost ξ as described in Sect. 3, which we will take to
correspond to the modular flow of some state of the fields in U; since the algebra of the fields is Type
III, this is necessarily an outer automorphism, so HS cannot be expressed in terms of an operator
localised to U.
    Let R ⊂ {Ci |i = 1, . . . , n} be some subset of the available clocks (which could be for example the
set of clocks contained in the region U), and let Rc = {Ci |i = 1, . . . , n} \ R be its complement. We are
interested in the observables accessible with the clocks Ci ∈ R. As in the previous sections, the algebra
of such observables may be formulated as the gauge-invariant subalgebra of kinematical operators
acting on the clocks and the fields in U:

                                                 SR = (AS ⊗ B(HR )) ,
                                                AH                                                                     (4.2)
                                                                   H


where HR = Ci ∈R Hi , and AS is the algebra of field observables with support in U. Picking any
                N

particular Ci ∈ R, we can decompose this algebra as
                                                                                    ′′
                             SR = {Oi (a), Ui (t) | a ∈ AS ⊗ B(HRī ), τ ∈ R, t ∈ R} ,
                            AH                                                                                         (4.3)
                                    τ


where Rī = R \ Ci , HRī =          Cj ∈Rī Hj , and
                                 N

                                      Z ∞
                          Oiτ (a) =          dt e−iHt (a ⊗ |τ ⟩⟨τ |i )eiHt ,    Ui (t) = e−iHi t ,                     (4.4)
                                        −∞

with |τ ⟩i being the clock states for Ci , and we are omitting identity factors and often rearranging
tensor factors to simplify the notation.
  The corresponding algebra of physical observables is r(AHSR ), acting on the physical Hilbert space
Hphys , obtained by imposing the constraint H = 0 as described previously.
   We will assume HS generates the modular flow with respect to AS of some cyclic and separating
QFT state |ψS ⟩ ∈ HS ; more precisely, we assume its modular operator is of the form ∆ψS = e−βHS ,
for some inverse temperature β. We will also take Rc to be non-empty. As described previously in
Sec. 2.8 (whose argument extends to arbitrarily many clocks), these assumptions guarantee that

                                                    r : AH
                                                         SR → r(ASR )
                                                                 H
                                                                                                                       (4.5)

is a faithful representation, and that r(AHSR ) is a Type II factor which we will confirm later. Our aim
in this section is to compute the density operator in the algebra r(AH   SR ) corresponding to a physical
state |ϕ) ∈ Hphys . In the interest of readability, some key details are reserved for Appendix C.


  32
     It should be noted that this line of reasoning will not necessarily lead to the same structure in the case of degenerate
clocks, which we explore further in Sec. 5.




                                                              34
4.1     Trace on the observable algebra
   Our goal is to create a trace using the basic property of a modular operator ∆Ψ , namely

                                                         ⟨Ψ|ab|Ψ⟩ = ⟨Ψ|b∆Ψ a|Ψ⟩ .                                                         (4.6)

If we can find a |Ψ⟩ for which ∆Ψ acts as an identity on a, possibly projected, Hilbert space, then we
propose the trace to be the expectation value of any operator in this state Tr(.) := ⟨Ψ|.|Ψ⟩. This will
define a good trace for the type II algebra r(AH SR ) due to faithfulness of the representation (4.5) and
the uniqueness of the trace up to scaling. To make the extension to multiple clocks, it will be necessary
to introduce auxiliary Hilbert spaces Hj∗ for every Cj ∈ Rī to be able to build |Ψ⟩. Afterwards, we can
map back from this extended Hilbert space to the physical Hilbert space by making use of the relative
modular operator.
   The first step is to write down a trace on AH
                                               SR . To this end, let us define a ‘thermofield double’ for
the clocks in Rī :                   Z
                            |ψRī ⟩ =                      dϵj e−βϵj /2 |ϵj ⟩ ⊗ ⟨ϵj | ∈                       Hj ⊗ Hj∗ .                  (4.7)
                                          O                                                         O

                                         Cj ∈Rī σj                                                Cj ∈Rī

This is a (non-normalisable – so technically speaking it is an abuse of notation to write |ψRī ⟩ ∈
  Cj ∈Rī Hj ⊗ Hj ) state for two copies of each of the clocks in Rī . It is cyclic and separating for B(HRī )
N               ∗

(unless otherwise stated we always take operators to act on the first copy of the Hilbert space Hj ,
rather than Hj∗ ), with Tomita operator given by (as confirmed in App. C)

                                                                          βHR /2                   −βHR /2
                                  SψR (|φ⟩ ⊗ ⟨ζ|) = e                        ī       |ζ⟩ ⊗ ⟨φ| e             ī       .                  (4.8)
                                          ī


One then finds the modular operator
                                                                                                                  
                                   ∆ψR = Sψ† R SψR = exp −β(HRī − HR∗ ) ,                                                                (4.9)
                                               ī          ī        ī                                  ī


where the ∗ denotes that the operator acts on the second copy of the clocks. We then set |ψSRī ⟩ =
|ψS ⟩ ⊗ |ψRī ⟩. The state |ψSRī ⟩ is cyclic and separating for AS ⊗ B(HRī ). It has a Tomita operator

                                                           SψSR = SψS ⊗ SRī ,                                                           (4.10)
                                                                     ī


where SψS is the Tomita operator associated with the QFT state |ψS ⟩, and modular operator
                                                                                                                               
                             ∆ψSR = ∆ψS ⊗ ∆Rī = exp −β(HS + HRī − HR∗ ) .                                                              (4.11)
                                    ī                                                                                     ī



   Consider the state

                        |Ψ⟩ = |ψSRī ⟩ ⊗ e−βHi /2 |0⟩i ∈ HS ⊗                                      Hj ⊗ Hj∗ ⊗ Hi .                       (4.12)
                                                                                          O                                

                                                                                         Cj ∈Rī


 SR acts on the Hilbert space containing this state.
AH
   As shown in Appendix C, |Ψ⟩ is separating for this action, and it is cyclic over a subspace

                                  e SR R∗ C = Π(H                                       Hj ⊗ Hj∗ ⊗ Hi ),                                 (4.13)
                                                                            O                       
                                  H   ī   i
                                              e S⊗
                                                    ī
                                                                           Cj ∈Rī

where
            Z ∞                                                             
      Π
      e =         dτ exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )τ ⟨τ |0⟩i ≡ Π̃[HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi , σi ].                                            (4.14)
                                                                ī                                                                  ī
            −∞


                                                                           35
This is a projector similar to the Page–Wootters one (2.52); it enforces the condition that when acting
on a state, the value of HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi must lie in the spectrum σi of clock Ci .
                                             ī

   Due to these properties, there is a Tomita operator for |Ψ⟩ and AH
                                                                    SR , defined on a dense subspace
of HSRī R Ci ; it may be written explicitly as
   e      ∗
         ī
                        Z ∞                                                              
                 SΨ =         dt eβHi /2 |t⟩i exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )t SψSR ⟨−t|i e−βHi /2 .               (4.15)
                                                                                 ī                ī
                        −∞

From this, the modular operator of |Ψ⟩ may be derived:
                                                        †
                                                  ∆Ψ = SΨ SΨ = Π.
                                                               e                                            (4.16)

Upon restriction to H
                    e SR R∗ R , one observes that ∆Ψ is just the identity operator. A direct confirmation
                        ī ī i
of these formulae may be found in Appendix C.
   These properties suffice to show that

                                             Tr(A) = eS0,R ⟨Ψ|A|Ψ⟩                                          (4.17)

defines a trace on AHSR , where S0,R is some normalisation constant (the motivation for this notation
will hopefully become clear later). Indeed, this functional is clearly normal, since it is the expectation
value in a Hilbert space state. It is faithful because |Ψ⟩ is separating. It obeys the cyclicity property
because ∆Ψ is the identity on the subspace over which |Ψ⟩ is cyclic:

              Tr(AB) = eS0,R ⟨Ψ|AB|Ψ⟩ = eS0,R ⟨Ψ|A∆Ψ B|Ψ⟩ = eS0,R ⟨Ψ|BA|Ψ⟩ = Tr(BA).                        (4.18)

Finally, it is semifinite; for an example of a finite trace operator, consider
                                      Z ∞
                                 A=         dt           θ(Hj ) |t⟩j ⟨t|j θ(Hj ) ∈ AH                       (4.19)
                                                  O
                                                                                    SR .
                                       −∞        Cj ∈R

Then one may show that
                                                           Y Z
                                      Tr(A) = e    S0,R
                                                                            dϵj e−βϵj ,                     (4.20)
                                                          Cj ∈R σj ∩R+

and all the integrals converge. Given Tr, we can define also a trace Trr on r(AH
                                                                               SR ) by using the fact
that the representation r restricted to AH
                                         SR is faithful (cf. Sec. 2.8):

                                                  Trr (r(A)) = Tr(A).                                       (4.21)

   The trace of the identity is given by

                     Tr(1) = Trr (1) = eS0,R ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩ = eS0,R ⟨ψRī |ψRī ⟩ ⟨0|i e−βHi |0⟩i .                  (4.22)

If R includes more than one frame, then this is infinite, because the thermofield double state is not
normalisable. However, if R contains only a single frame, then we have
                                                                          1 S0,R
                                                                                      Z
                              Tr(1) = eS0,R ⟨0|i e−βHi |0⟩i =               e                 dϵi e−βϵi .   (4.23)
                                                                         2π           σi

We see that Tr(1) is then finite if and only if σi is bounded below. It is convenient in this case to set
                                                      1
                                                                   Z                 
                                                                             −βϵi
                                        S0,R = − log                     dϵi e            ,                 (4.24)
                                                     2π             σi

so that Tr(1) = 1.

                                                               36
4.2     Density operator
   Next, given a physical state |ϕ), we wish to find the density matrix ρϕ in the algebra r(AH
                                                                                             SR ). The
density operator is defined to obey
                                                                              
                  eS0,R ⟨Ψ|r−1 (ρϕ )A|Ψ⟩ = Tr r−1 (ρϕ )A = Trr (ρϕ r(A)) = (ϕ|r(A)|ϕ) .                                                                     (4.25)
In fact, the density operator is given by
                                                    r−1 (ρϕ ) = e−S0,R ∆ϕ|Ψ ,                                                                               (4.26)
i.e. the relative modular operator from |Ψ⟩ to |ϕ), intertwined through the representation r, scaled by
e−S0,R . Indeed, one may easily verify that such an operator suffices for equality between the left hand
and right hand sides in (4.25). Moreover, it is generally true that for any two states ϕ, Ψ with Ψ cyclic
                                  −1/2       −1/2
and separating for an algebra, ∆Ψ ∆ϕ|Ψ ∆Ψ         is an element of the algebra — in our case ∆Ψ is the
identity, which confirms that the r (ρϕ ) given above is an element of AH
                                    −1
                                                                            SR .

   So to derive the density operator, let us first give the relative Tomita operator; it is
                       Z ∞                                                                                                                        
        Sϕ|Ψ = Πphys          dt |t⟩i Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR ⟨0|i exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )(t + iβ/2) ,                                                           (4.27)
                                                     ī                                                               ī
                         −∞

where |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ = Ri (τ ) |ϕ) is the reduced state when clock Ci reads τ , and Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR is a relative
                                                                                            ī
Tomita operator for the algebra AS ⊗ B(HRī ). One may employ this formula to obtain
                                       Z ∞
              †                                                          −1/2                                                             −1/2
      ∆ϕ|Ψ = Sϕ|Ψ Sϕ|Ψ = eβHi /2               dt e−iHi t Oiτ (∆ψSR Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ∆ψSR )eβHi /2 ,                                            (4.28)
                                                                                        |i                                      ī
                                        −∞                                     ī                                ī                          ī

which holds for any τ . A full derivation is given in Appendix C. The density operator is thus given by
                                                   Z ∞
                                                                                        −1/2                                                      −1/2
 ρϕ = e−S0,R r(∆ϕ|Ψ ) = e−S0,R Vi (iβ/2)                     dt Vi (t)Oiτ (∆ψSR Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ∆ψSR )Vi (iβ/2).
                                                                                                            |i                               ī
                                                    −∞                                        ī                           ī                          ī
                                                                                              (4.29)
Note that the unusual combination of Tomita and modular operators appearing inside Oiτ (. . . ) is in
fact an element of AS ⊗ B(HRī ), which is also shown in Appendix C.
   The ρϕ we have just found is the density operator at the perspective-neutral level. To find the
density operator in the perspective of a particular Ci ∈ R, we can simply conjugate ρϕ with the
reduction map Ri (τ ). To be precise, because Ri (τ ) is an isometry, we can define a trace on the algebra
ARī S|Ci via
                                     Tr|i (·) = Trr (Ri (τ )† (·)Ri (τ )),                           (4.30)
and it is easy to verify that the density operator of the perspective-reduced state |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ with respect
to this trace is given by ρϕ|i (τ ) = Ri (τ )ρϕ Ri (τ )† . In Appendix C, it is shown that
                                                            Z ∞
                              −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                        P
                                                                            i(HS +                      Hj )t †
             ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i e                        ī               dt e                  j̸=i            Sϕ (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR .                  (4.31)
                                                                                                                |i                      ī
                                                                −∞                                                                   ī

Note that the HR∗ that appears in this formula will be cancelled out by contributions from the relative
                  ī
Tomita operators, and there will be no overall action on the second copy of the clocks in Rī . To
confirm this let us decompose the reduced state |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ as

                                              |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ =             |ϕIS (τ )⟩ ⊗ |ϕ̃I (τ )⟩ ,                                                            (4.32)
                                                                  X

                                                                   I

where I is some continuous or discrete label, |ϕIS (τ )⟩ ∈ HS , and |ϕ̃I (τ )⟩ ∈                                                     i̸=j Hj . Then one has
                                                                                                                                N

                                 Z ∞                P
                                          i(HS +                  Hj )t X
 ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i e−S0,R −βHRc          dt e                j̸=i               Sϕ† I (τ +t)|ψ SϕJ (τ )|ψS ⊗ trRc ( |ϕ̃I (τ + t)⟩ ⟨ϕ̃J (τ )|).
                                 −∞                                                 S                   S        S
                                                                        I,J
                                                                                                                                                            (4.33)
This is explicitly shown in Appendix C. As claimed, the HR∗ has dropped out.
                                                                                                   ī



                                                                        37
4.3   Partial trace over a clock
   Suppose the set R contains at least two clocks. We can imagine removing one particular clock Ci ∈ R
from this set, and asking how this affects our observations. We clearly have r(AHS R\Ci ) ⊂ r(ASR ), so
                                                                                                H

the set of operators we are allowed to act with is reduced – since we can no longer dress to Ci , or
reorient it.
   A good way to understand the effect of removing Ci is to consider the consequences for the density
operator. One may note that the density operator ρR ∈ r(AH          SR ) uniquely determines the density
operator ρR\C i ∈ r(AS R\Ci ) for the set of clocks R \ Ci , via the condition that the expectation values
                     H

agree. Indeed, let TrR and TrR\Ci denote the traces for the two sets of clocks; then we have

                         TrR (ρR a) = TrR\Ci (ρR\Ci a)             for all            S R\Ci ).
                                                                               a ∈ r(AH                             (4.34)

This equation determines a map from density matrices in r(AHSR ) to the corresponding density matrices
in r(AHS R\Ci ). This map should be understood   as a generalised   partial trace (in the same way in
which the traces constructed above are generalised matrix traces), which integrates out the degrees of
freedom of Ci .
   We may explicitly write down the partial trace. Indeed, pick a Cj ∈ R with Ci ̸= Cj , and let

                                       ρR = r(ρ̃R ),         ρR\Ci = r(ρ̃R\Ci )                                     (4.35)

denote the density operators for R and R \ Ci respectively (note that since r is faithful on each algebra,
each of ρ̃R , ρ̃R\Ci are uniquely determined by ρR , ρR\Ci respectively). Then for a = r(ã) ∈ r(AHS R\Ci )
we have

           TrR (ρR a) = eS0,R ⟨ψSRj̄ | ⊗ ⟨0|j e−βHj /2 ρ̃R ã |ψSRj̄ ⟩ ⊗ e−βHj /2 |0⟩j                              (4.36)
                                                                                                        

                                                     −βH /2 
                      = eS0,R ⟨ψSRij | ⊗ ⟨0|j e                   tri (e−βHi ρ̃R )ã |ψSRij ⟩ ⊗ e−βHj /2 |0⟩j       (4.37)
                                                                                                                
                                                         j

                                                                             
                      = eS0,R −S0,R\Ci TrR\Ci r(tri (e−βHi ρ̃R ))a ,                                                (4.38)

where Rij = R \ {Ci , Cj }, and tri denotes the ordinary Hilbert space trace for Hi . Therefore, the
partial trace over clock Ci is given by
                                                                                                    
                                           S0,R −S0,R\Ci
                               Ci : ρ 7→ e
                             TrR                         r tri (e−βHi r−1 (ρR )) .                                  (4.39)
                                     R


One observes that the constants S0,R and S0,R\Ci are related to the overall normalisation of the partial
trace. In some circumstances, we can use this relationship to constrain these constants in a canonical
way, by considering the partial traces of certain operators.
                                                τ
   Consider, for example, the operator Oj j (|τi ⟩⟨τi |i ), which conditions on the difference in times of
clock Ci and Cj being τj − τi . Then one may show that

                                                        1 S0,R −S0,R\C
                                                                                  Z
                                   τ
                          TrR
                            Ci (Oj (|τi ⟩⟨τi |i )) =
                                  j
                                                          e           i1    dϵi e−βϵi .                             (4.40)
                                                       2π                σi

If the spectrum of Hi is bounded below, we see that this is finite and proportional to the identity. This
is independent of the particular time difference τj − τi that we condition on, which, physically speaking,
makes intuitive sense: if we trace out the clock Ci , then it should not matter how we condition on its
time relative to the other clocks. If we pick S0,R and S0,R\Ci such that

                                                        1
                                                                      Z                     
                                                                                      −βϵi
                                S0,R − S0,R\Ci = − log                        dϵi e              ,                  (4.41)
                                                       2π                σi



                                                             38
then we in fact have
                                                      τ
                                              TrR
                                                Ci (Oj (|τi ⟩⟨τi |i )) = 1.
                                                      j
                                                                                                                 (4.42)
This provides a canonical way to pick the constants S0,R and S0,R\Ci .
    In particular, suppose all the clocks in R have spectrum bounded below, and let us enforce the
following conditions: the trace on the algebra r(AH  SCi ) obeys Tr (1) = 1 for all Ci ∈ R; and the
                                                                   Ci

partial traces all obey (4.42). Then this uniquely determines
                                                                     1
                                                                        Z            
                                      S0,R = −            log                 dϵi e−βϵi .                        (4.43)
                                                  X

                                                 Ci ∈R
                                                                    2π   σi



4.4    Comparison with previous work
   We now pause to compare our density operator expressions (4.33) to those obtained in [21] (CLPW)
and [24] (JSS) in similar settings. To some extent this amounts to a mere translation between
conventions, and where the treatments overlap we use this as a consistency check. However we also
comment on some differences of methodology and generalisations available in our construction (aside
from the primary generalisation to include an arbitrary numbers of reference frames, which we here
eschew for sake of comparison). Some details are placed in appendix E.
   We wish to compare our density operator expressions to the those of CLPW and JSS in the case
that there are only two frames, which we denote C1 and C2 . We will consider the kinematical algebra
AHSC1 and its physical or gauge-fixed representations. The first major methodological difference in
our approach was noted already in section 3.2 and illustrated in figure 3.3. This is that both JSS
and CLPW always begin with ideal clocks (having unbounded spectrum). After computing density
operators for semiclassical states, they then implement projections to limit the spectra of one or both
clocks to the positive real line, effectively turning these from ideal to non-ideal clocks. Our approach,
by contrast, has been to begin with a kinematical Hilbert space on which the clocks are already
non-ideal, and then implement the gauge-constraint by mapping states and operators to the physical
Hilbert space and/or gauge-fixed ‘reduced’ Hilbert spaces.
   Another hindrance to direct comparison of our density operator expressions is that we have written
ours, by default, in the perspective of a frame whose reorientations are part of the algebra under
consideration, which in this case means taking the perspective of clock C1 and not C2 . This can be
thought of as an alternate choice of gauge-fixing, via a map that is unitarily related to the T2 map
of (3.16) (which was introduced in Eq. 4.10 of [21]). In our language, the T2 map is a reduction ‘to
the perspective’ of frame C2 in orientation |τ2 = 0⟩, which leaves the algebra AH SC1 intact in its usual
form, apart from stripping the identity factor on H2 and, in the case of non-ideal C2 , implementing an
additional projection for compatibility with the bounds of the C2 sprectrum (compare equations (3.29)
and (3.30)). Note that regardless of which clock perspective we adopt, we are presently considering
the algebra AHSC1 and its representation under different gauge fixings, as opposed to alternative choices
of algebra (e.g. AHSC1 versus ASC2 or (ASC1 ) ). Both CLPW and JSS consider states of the form
                                H         H   ′


                                               |Φ̂⟩|C2 = |Φ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩C1 ,                                          (4.44)

which are completely unentangled.33 We therefore proceed by mapping states of this form to the
perspective of frame C1 , at which point we can apply our density operator expressions from section
4.2. Another frame change map then returns this density operator to the perspective of clock C2 , at


  33
     More specifically, we would say such states are unentangled between factors S and C1 , as seen from the perspective
of clock C2 , at least up to the effect of the projector Π|2 which must ultimately be implemented if C2 is non-ideal.


                                                            39
which point we will have expression directly analogous to those of CLPW and JSS. The details of this
computation are shown in appendix E. The result (equation (E.19)) can be written
                                                      ext
                                       (R→σC1 ) −iHS TC                                          ext
                                                                                            iHS TC      (σC →R) ∗
 ρΦ̂|C2 = 2πN f (HC1 )Π|C2 ΠC1                     e         1   Sϕ† S |ψS Πext
                                                                            |C2 SϕS |ψS e
                                                                                                  1    ΠC1 1
                                                                                  f (HC1 )eβ(HS +HC1 ) .
                                                                                                   (4.45)
The operators in the center of this expression all act on the extended/ideal Hilbert space for clock
                                                         σC →R
C1 , and the operators ΠC1 1 := σC dϵ |ϵ⟩ ⟨ϵ|ext and ΠC1 1      := σC dϵ |ϵ⟩ext ⟨ϵ| return this extended
                        R→σC      R                                R
                                     1                                 1
operator to the non-ideal clock C1 Hilbert space. In the case that clock C2 is ideal, 4.45 can be written
   (σC =R)
  ρΦ̂|C2        = 2πN
         2
                        ext /2
             (R→σC1 ) βHC                            ext
                                               −iHS TC      −1/2                        ext
                                                                              −1/2 iHS TC   ∗
                                                                                                                 ext /2
                                                                                                               βHC         (σC →R)
       × ΠC1         e    1      f (HCext
                                       1
                                          )e           1   ∆ΨS ∆ϕS |ψS ∆ΨS e             1      f (HCext
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                         )e        1      ΠC 1 1     . (4.46)

Up to conventional normalisation constant, and swapping HCext    1
                                                                   → q̂ and TCext
                                                                               1
                                                                                  → −p̂34 , this is seen to
be equivalent to JSS [24, equation 5.13]. On the other hand, when C2 is not ideal, equation (4.45)
represents a nontrivial generalisation. An important asymmetry between the clock frames is that
when only clock 1 is non-ideal, the density operator for the algebra AH  SC1 can be obtained directly by
projection (with ΠC1 ) from the ideal case. This is the method employed by both JSS and CLPW, and
it is essentially what equation (4.46) expresses. By contrast, when C2 is non-ideal, direct projection
with Π|C2 would not result in the correct density matrix. This stems from the fact that this projector
is an element of the commutant algebra rather than the algebra itself, and the projected algebra is not
a subalgebra of the ideal algebra. This is discussed in more detail in appendix E, where we further
verify expression (4.45) by giving an alternate derivation of the density operator, essentially modifying
the method employed by JSS in [24, appendix E].
   While both JSS and CLPW discuss the possibility of non-ideal complementary frames, they only
report explicit density operator expressions for states that are approximate product states, meaning
they satisfy (Π|C2 |ΦS ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩C1 ≈ |ΦS ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩C1 ). Thus their results are not incorrect, but our expressions
are more general in the case of non-ideal complementary frame.

4.5      The need for a complementary frame
   In [21, Sec. 4.3], when considering the algebra of observables in a static patch of de Sitter, it was
noted that there is a stark difference between the case of including only a single observer to dress
the patch algebra, versus including an additional observer associated with the complement patch. In
either case, the original subsystem algebra is a type III1 factor. When both observers are included,
the dressed algebra becomes a type II von Neumann factor on the physical Hilbert space. If the
complement observer is absent, this transition to type II occurs for the gauge-invariant algebra at the
kinematical level, but the representation of this algebra on the physical Hilbert space fails altogether
to be von Neumann. Our technical summary of the reason for this was given already in Sec. 2.8, but
we here review that discussion in the present context, in view of our generalisations to an arbitrary
number of reference frames.
   All of the kinematical gauge-invariant algebras AHSC1 ...Cn are von Neumann by construction. In
particular, they are closed under a bicommutant on the kinematical Hilbert space. To discern whether
they remain von Neumann in their representation on the physical Hilbert space, it is useful to consider
their bicommutant with respect to the set of gauge-invariant kinematical operators.35 None of these


  34
     The minus sign on p here comes from the fact that when q̂ is the frame contribution to the constraint instead of
                                                                  −iT ext H iT ext H
HC1 , algebra elements are dressed as eip̂HS ae−ip̂HS instead of e C1 S ae C1 S .
  35
       The von Neumann nature of these kinematical algebras refers explicitly to their representation on the kinematical


                                                                      40
algebras are closed under this restricted bicommutant, because at least the bounded functions of the
constraint itself are appended by the operation. If these are the only operators which this bicommutant
appends, then the representation on the physical Hilbert space will remain von Neumann, since the
bounded functions of the constraint map trivially to the identity component (c-numbers) on the
physical Hilbert space. When the action of HS is ergodic on A′ , as is true in the case of de Sitter
patches [21, 90], the gauge invariant commutant of AH      SC1 ...Cn will contain none of the elements a ∈ A ,
                                                                                                         ′     ′

or dressed versions thereof, unless at least one clock Cn+1 is left over. With an additional clock present,
elements of the form OC  τ
                           n+1
                               (a′ ), a′ ∈ A′ are part of the gauge-invariant commutant, so that dressed
elements of A′ are excluded from the gauge-invariant bicommutant. In the absence of this additional
clock, the bicommutant always adds elements of the form OC           τ (a′ ) (for example). Thus it is apparent
                                                                      1
that algebras of the form AH SC1 ...Cn   will never be von Neuman     when   represented on the physical Hilbert
space unless there is at least one complementary clock. It has been observed [89] that the need for a
complement observer is likely connected to the failure of convergence of all single-particle states in a
de Sitter group-averaging inner product [128]. Both are the result of pathologically ‘unbalanced’ de
Sitter configurations, which at the classical level manifest as a linearisation instability [40].
   It is perhaps not surprising that the properties of a local algebra for an observer depends on the
contents of the rest of the universe in gauge theory – after all the gauge constraints are non-local
conditions on the theory (although we note that the authors of [21] took an alternative viewpoint, and
a complete interpretation of the discussion above remains open).


5     Subregion density operators with degenerate clocks
    So far, we have been dealing with clocks whose Hamiltonian is non-degenerate when computing
the density operators in Sec. 4. Let us now generalise our construction to the case where the clock
Hamiltonians have degenerate spectra, in order to investigate the consequences of this degeneracy for
density operators and later entropies. The case that is of most physical importance is when HC ∝ p2 as
it arises for free particles or in relativistic dispersion relations, but for now we will take the degeneracy
to be more general.

5.1     Degenerate quantum clocks as QRFs
   We start by ‘replicating’ Sec. 2 for degenerate clocks, following some of the discussion in [69], before
constructing density operators in their presence in Sec. 5.2.

5.1.1    Covariant POVMs for degenerate clocks
Let us summarise the necessary modifications of Sec. 2.1 when HC has a degenerate continuous
spectrum, but the degeneracy does not depend on the energy (except possibly for a set of measure
zero). Clock states (2.1) now read
                                                 1
                                                       Z
                                      |t, λ⟩ := √           dϵ eig(ϵ) e−itϵ |ϵ, λ⟩ ,                             (5.1)
                                                  2π   σC

where λ labels the degeneracy sectors. Since these sectors are orthogonal, we further have

                                          t, λ t′ , λ′ = δλλ′ χ(t − t′ ),                                        (5.2)


Hilbert space, with the relevant commutant being with respect to the full set of bounded operators B(Hkin ). However
we are free to consider other commutant operations, such as that with respect to a restricted set of operators like the
gauge-invariant kinematical operators B(Hkin )H .



                                                           41
where χ(t − t′ ) is the overlap distribution in Eq. (2.7). Clearly, per λ-sector, all the previous properties
apply and the clock states give rise to a covariant clock POVM per λ-sector. In particular, the
normalisation takes the form
                                               Z
                                                    dt |t, λ⟩⟨t, λ| = Πλ ,                              (5.3)
                                                R

with Πλ the projector onto the λ-degeneracy sector of HC and λ Πλ = 1C . A covariant clock POVM
                                                                                     P

for the full Hilbert space HC is thus obtained by summing over the degeneracy sectors.
    A relevant example is a clock Hamiltonian of the form HC = sp2 /2m with s = ±1, as they appear
in many relativistic and non-relativistic examples. Its spectrum σC = s[0, ∞) is doubly degenerate,
except for its zero eigenvalue, and clock states can be written as [69, 111]
                                          Z        q                                 2
                             |t, λ⟩ =         dp     |p|Θ(−λp)eig(p) e−itsp /2m |p⟩ ,                   (5.4)
                                          R

where λ = ±1 labels positive and negative frequency (or left and right moving) sectors. We have
Π± = Θ(∓p) and, since |t, λ⟩ has zero support on p = 0, also Π± |t, ∓⟩ = 0. It can be shown [69, 109,
168] that the first moment operator of the corresponding POVM is a symmetric quantisation of the
classically conjugate time variable T = s mq
                                          2p , which thus is monotonic along the flow generated by HC
regardless of the frequency sector, i.e.
                                    (1)       X Z                                    m  −1       
                  T (1) =                 =             dt t |t, λ⟩⟨t, λ| = s           qp + p−1 q .    (5.5)
                            X
                                   Tλ
                            λ=±1              λ=±1 R
                                                                                     4


5.1.2   Decomposition of Hilbert spaces and observable algebras
Let us analyze the equivalent of Secs. 2.2 and 2.3 for the case when the clock spectrum is degenerate in
an energy-independent way (except possibly for a set of measure zero). This discussion will somewhat
generalise the one in [69], which was restricted to quadratic Hamiltonians. From the above, we know
that if clock C has degenerate spectrum, then its Hilbert space can be decomposed into a direct sum
over the degeneracy sectors labeled by λ

                                                       HC =                                             (5.6)
                                                               M
                                                                          λ
                                                                         HC ,
                                                                 λ

where each single HC
                   λ is a copy of L2 (σ ). This means that the total kinematical Hilbert space
                                        C
decomposes as (where we collect all remaining degrees of freedom in a single system S)

                                                   Hkin = HS ⊗                                          (5.7)
                                                                         M
                                                                               λ
                                                                              HC .
                                                                          λ

Alternatively, we can write the clock Hilbert spaces as

                                                    HC = L2 (σC ) ⊗ Cm ,                                (5.8)

where m is the number of degeneracy sectors, i.e. the multiplicity. The first tensor factor above gives
the energy wavefunction, while the latter accounts for the different sectors. We then have

                                              Hkin = HS ⊗ L2 (σC ) ⊗ Cm                                 (5.9)

The factor Cm may be viewed as a Hilbert space for a set of internal degrees of freedom of clock C.
   The decomposition (5.7) carries over to the physical Hilbert space [69] as well

                                                       Hphys =                                         (5.10)
                                                                 M
                                                                          Hλ .
                                                                     λ


                                                              42
One can see this by defining the charge operator Q := λ cλ Πλ ∈ Ainv for some cλ ∈ R with cλ =
                                                                                             ̸ cλ′ ,
                                                         P

whose eigenspace with eigenvalue cλ corresponds to the λ-degeneracy sector. Then one observes that
Πλ and the charge Q commute with H, leading to the decomposition.
   As for the algebra, on the kinematical Hilbert space we have the following algebra of observables
prior to imposing gauge-invariance

                                   ASC = AS ⊗ B(L2 (σC )) ⊗ B(Cm ).                                  (5.11)

Compared to the non-degenerate case, we now also have access to operators which swap between
the different degeneracy sectors of the clocks. These are contained in the tensor factor B(Cm ). The
gauge-invariant subalgebra may then be written as (rearranging tensor factors for convenience)
                                                          H
                                 Ainv = AS ⊗ B(L2 (σC ))        ⊗ B(Cm ).                            (5.12)

The first factor is equivalent to the algebra in the non-degenerate case, consisting of the relational
observables OCτ (a) (2.12) and clock reorientations U (t), while the latter factor is just a matrix algebra
                                                     C
and encodes the sector dependency. Thus, when AS is von Neumann, then so is Ainv ; the latter will
again be a Type II factor when AS is a Type III1 factor and H a modular Hamiltonian.

5.1.3   Operational superselection
Suppose the system S contains multiple degenerate clocks. There are then various subalgebras of
Ainv one can consider, corresponding to subtly different subsystems. To see this, let us recall the
motivations we gave at the beginning of Sec. 4 for the degrees of freedom accessible to a certain
observer travelling along a worldline. The basic assumption is that the observer can act on all of the
degrees of freedom in the vicinity of the worldline. By the timelike tube theorem, it can then also act
on the fields in the timelike envelope of the worldline, which (under certain assumptions [158]) may be
identified with the region U. Using the gravitational constraints we then argued that the observer
may have access to the times and energies of some subset of other clocks Ci . Thus, the observer may
act with arbitrary operators on the L2 (σi ) factor of the clock Hilbert space. But it is not necessarily
true that the observer can act on the internal degrees of freedom i.e. the Cmi factor – unless such
degrees of freedom can be related to the fields via the gravitational constraints. Whether this is true
in practice changes depending on the exact nature of the clock, and at the present level of abstraction
it should be viewed as operational input. If an observer cannot act on the internal degrees of freedom,
then from the observer’s perspective clock Ci undergoes superselection – since any of the operators
the observer uses to act on Ci must be block-diagonal in the degeneracy sectors.
   Another way in which the subsystem can change is purely internal to the observer itself. There
may be a good physical reason why an observer would be restricted to acting within some subset of its
own degeneracy sectors. For example, for the quadratic Hamiltonian observer described in Sec. 5.1.1,
the two degeneracy sectors correspond to positive and negative frequency modes of the clock, and it
may be desirable to restrict to the positive frequency mode sector (see for example [61]).
    In any case, it is clear that there are various scenarios one can consider, and one needs operational
input to choose between them. What should be clear is that, depending on the particular scenario, we
will get different algebras of observables, and hence differing manifestations of the observer-dependence
of entropy (see Sec. 8.2).
   In Sec. 5.1.2, we have assumed there is no superselection and therefore we need to take the sector-
swapping operators into account. Here, we discuss what happens if we take the gauge-invariant algebra
to be superselected across the λ-sectors.


                                                    43
   Recalling from Sec. 5.1.1 that the covariant clock POVM decomposes across the λ-degeneracy
sectors of clock C, EC (X) = λ X⊂R dt |t, λ⟩⟨t, λ|, we see that the relational observables in Eq. (2.12)
                            P R

decompose across the λ-sectors:
                                                     XZ                                      †
                       (a) =                 (a) =            dt USC (t) (a ⊗ |τ, λ⟩⟨τ, λ|) USC (t),   (5.13)
                               X
                     τ                   τ
                    OC                  OC,λ
                                   λ                  λ   R


where OC,λ
         τ (a) = (1 ⊗ Π )O τ (a) = O τ (a)(1 ⊗ Π ). Clearly, the clock reorientations decompose
                    S     λ    C        C       S     λ
similarly and thereby give rise to a reducible representation of the translation group on HC ,

                   UC (τ ) ⊗ 1S =             UC,λ (τ ) ⊗ 1S ,         UC,λ (τ ) := exp(−iτ Πλ HC ).   (5.14)
                                         X

                                          λ

In other words, the entire gauge-invariant algebra (2.11) for the superselected situation decomposes
across the degeneracy sectors
                                                 MD                                             E
                      inv =            Aλinv =            (a), 1S ⊗ UC,λ (t) a ∈ AS , t ∈ R .          (5.15)
                              M
                     Ass                              τ
                                                     OC,λ
                               λ                 λ

In particular, note that 1S ⊗ Πλ ∈ Ass
                                    inv , so Ainv is a proper subalgebra of Ainv .
                                              λ                              ss


   The gauge-invariant algebra is superselected across the λ-sectors and thus reducibly represented on
Hkin . Indeed, since the charge Q = λ cλ Πλ commutes with every element in Ass       inv , it is part of its
                                      P

center. Hence, no observable in Ass
                                  inv can map between  the λ-sectors, leading to the  superselection rule
                      τ
                     OC (a) = ⊕λ OC,λ
                                  τ
                                      (a),                     1S ⊗ UC (τ ) = 1S ⊗ ⊕λ UC,λ (τ ).       (5.16)

Interactions will ruin this superselection rule if they do not commute with the projectors Πλ .
   For instance, in the case of a quadratic clock Hamiltonian HC = −p2 , as briefly discussed in
                                                                              p|2 +m2 and minisuperspace
Sec. 5.1.1 and as they appear in relativistic dispersion relations H = −p2t +|⃗
models, the observables will get superselected across the positive and negative frequency sectors [69].
Interactions can lift this superselection; e.g. in a closed FRW model with massive scalar field, positive
and negative frequency modes mix [114].
    Invoking the argument in appendix A.2 per λ-sector entails that, if AS is von Neumann, then so
are Ass
      inv and each of the Ainv . The individual Ainv may be factors (when considered as algebras acting
                           λ                     λ

within their corresponding λ-sectors), depending on some conditions. For example, they are when AS
is a type III1 factor and HS is a modular Hamiltonian as in the case of perturbative quantum gravity
below.
   Moreover, due to the decomposition (5.10), we obtain a reducible physical representation r of the
gauge-invariant algebra (here expressed in co-invariant language)
                                                              M           
                                                    inv ) =
                                                 r(Ass               r Aλinv .                         (5.17)
                                                                 λ

Hence, coherent superpositions across Q charge sectors in the physical Hilbert space are indistinguishable
from corresponding classical mixtures when probed with observables from r(Ainv ).
    While we started with one clock C, we can think of the different charge sectors as corresponding
to different quantum clocks Cλ . The covariant POVM EC,λ (X) = Πλ EC (X) models Cλ on the clock
Hilbert space HC λ . The λ-sector H of the physical Hilbert space can thus be viewed as the sector
                                     λ
of the theory in which this clock Cλ exists. A given observer may only have access to a clock with
fixed charge λ, e.g. a clock with only positive frequencies in relativity. Such an observer can then only
probe the λ-sector and will be oblivious to what happens outside it.

                                                              44
5.1.4   Page-Wootters formalism for degenerate clocks
When the clock spectrum is degenerate, a reduction map like Eq. (2.32) can be defined making
use of the decomposition of the physical Hilbert space in its degeneracy sectors (5.10) through
RC (τ ) : Hphys → λ H|C,λ , where H|C,λ are the reduced Hilbert spaces of the λ-sector and
                 L


                          RC (τ ) := ⊕λ RC,λ (τ ),             R†C (τ ) := ⊕λ R†C,λ (τ ) .              (5.18)

Sector-wise everything works as before and so

  RC (τ )R†C (τ ) = ⊕λ RC,λ (τ )R†C,λ (τ ) = ⊕λ Π|C,λ ,    R†C (τ )RC (τ ) = ⊕λ R†C,λ (τ )RC,λ (τ ) = 1phys ,
                                                                                                         (5.19)
where Π|C,λ = ⟨τ, λ| Πphys |τ, λ⟩ = Π|C for all λ, as all reduced spaces are isomorphic copies. So far, we
have invoked the setting of co-invariants. Using Eq. (2.41), it is related to the PW-reduction in RAQ
language
                     RC,λ (τ ) = R′C,λ (τ )M † ,    with      R′C,λ (τ ) := ⟨τ, λ| ⊗ 1S .                (5.20)
Thus, only the reduction maps per λ-superselection sector RC,λ (τ ) are invertible [69]. Specifically, the
reduction theorems in Eqs. (2.43) and (2.45) only hold per λ-sector,

                      RC,λ (τ ) r(Aλinv )R†C,λ (τ ) = Π|C a, US (t) a ∈ AS , t ∈ R Π|C .                (5.21)

Since the clock states (5.1) satisfy the same covariance property (2.2) as in the non-degenerate case,
the reduced form of this algebra will be the same for each superselection sector.
   Every λ-sector also has its own relational Schrödinger equation Eq. (2.36), but again it will take
the same form in each sector. For example, for quadratic Hamiltonians, τ -time will run forward in
both the positive and negative frequency sectors [69].
   The reduction maps also act on the sector swaps, i.e. elements of B(Cm ) in (5.12). Taking a single
sector swap as SλC′ λ of the same clock, we have that due to orthogonality when we reduce with respect
to the same clock that
                                                   †
                                RC,λ1 (τ )SλC2 λ3 RC,λ4
                                                        (τ ) = δλ1 λ2 δλ3 λ4 Π|C .              (5.22)
Hence, sector swaps of the clock we reduce to vanish under the reduction to a single degeneracy sector
due to them being λ-block off-diagonal. Nevertheless, they will generally not vanish when we perform a
global reduction as in (5.18), as this can lead to sector-wise off-diagonal conjugation with the reduction
maps. In this case, the reduced algebra will still have swap operators between sectors of the clock we
reduce to.
   In contrast, if we reduce a sector swap of some other clock C ′ for instance, then
                                                   ′   †              ′
                                      RC,λ (τ )SσC′ σ RC,λ (τ ) = SσC′ σ Π|C .                          (5.23)

Sector swaps of other clocks than the one we reduce to do not vanish, regardless of whether we perform
a sector-wise or global reduction.

5.1.5   Changing degenerate clocks
Let us discuss how we can perform QRF transformations, as in Sec. 2.6, between degenerate clocks.
Since the reduction maps (5.18) are invertible per sector, QRF transformations can be defined on
a combined sector (λ1 , λ2 ) of the two degenerate clocks. We will restrict the coming discussion to
this situation, which can be thought of as a superselection case of Sec. 5.1.3. One can define a larger
QRF transformation by taking direct sums of the ones we will discuss. This larger transformation is
invertible because they are sector-wise invertible, in the same way as (5.19).

                                                        45
   Suppose Alice has access to the superselection sector λ1 of clock C1 , while Bob only has access to
superselection sector λ2 of C2 . They can then only compare observables in the subalgebra

     Aλinv
         1 ,λ1
                 := (AS ⊗ B(H1,λ1 ) ⊗ B(H2,λ2 ))H                                                                              (5.24)
                      D                                                                              E
                           τi
                 =        OC i ,λi
                                   (a), 1S ⊗ Ui,λi (t) ⊗ 1j a ∈ AS ⊗ B(Hj,λj ), t ∈ R                       i, j = 1, 2, i ̸= j,

as it contains all those observables which can be written as relational observables and reorientations
relative to either of the clocks C1,λ1 and C2,λ2 . This is a subalgebra of both Aλinv
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      and Aλinv
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                , in fact,
                      λ1 ,λ2   λ1     λ2
it is their overlap Ainv = Ainv ∩ Ainv . This will become important later when Alice and Bob with
different clocks cannot compare the full density operators they have respectively access to, but only
the part residing in the overlap of the algebras.
   The physical Hilbert space splits into superselection sectors (5.10) relative to both clocks [69]

                                              Hphys =           Hµ1 =                                                          (5.25)
                                                          M               M
                                                                               Hµ2 ,
                                                           µ1             µ2

where we use µi as the dummy summation variable over the superselection sectors of clock Ci , to
distinguish it from the specific sectors λi . The domain of the physical representation r(Aλinv
                                                                                              1 ,λ2
                                                                                                    ) is the
overlap of the two sectors Hλ1 ,λ2 := Hλ1 ∩ Hλ2 , i.e. the subsector where both clocks C1,λ1 and C2,λ2
exist and we can thus compare and relate their corresponding relational descriptions.
   As the “quantum coordinate maps” in Eq. (5.20) are now defined per superselection sector for each
clock, we also have that the two observers can only compare states in the sector overlap Hλ1 ,λ2 , i.e.
clock changes are defined here [69] (see also [124, 136]):

                                                                Hλ1 ,λ2
                                R1,λ1 (τ1 )                                                   R2,λ2 (τ2 )



  Hλ2 |1 = Π|1 (HS ⊗ H2,λ2 )                                                                          Hλ1 |2 = Π|2 (HS ⊗ H1,λ1 )
                                              V1,λ1 →2,λ2 (τ1 ,τ2 )=R2,λ2 (τ2 )◦R†1,λ (τ1 )
                                                                                       1


The doubly superselected clock change transformation (2.53) thus becomes
                                                                    Z
        V1,λ1 →2,λ2 (τ1 , τ2 ) := R2,λ2 (τ2 ) ◦ R†1,λ1 (τ1 ) =           dt |t + τ1 , λ1 ⟩1 ⊗ ⟨τ2 − t, λ2 |2 ⊗ US (t).         (5.26)
                                                                     R

As before, it is a controlled, hence non-local unitary.
   By combining sectors in the reduction maps appropriately, one can also transform sector swaps
from one perspective to another. Furthermore, a full QRF transformation could be carried out by
summing over all sector-wise ones.

5.1.6     Subsystem relativity for degenerate clocks
Suppose again that Alice has access to superselection sector λ1 of clock C1 , while Bob only has access
to superselection sector λ2 of C2 . As they can only compare observables in the subalgebra Aλinv   1 ,λ2


(5.24), we consider subsystem relativity within it. Defining for i = 1, 2, i ̸= j,
                                                                                          H
                                          SCi ,λi := AS ⊗ B(Hi,λi ) ⊗ 1j,λj
                                         AH                                                                                    (5.27)

with 1j,λj the identity on the subspace Hj,λj , we clearly have
                                                                               H
                                     SC1 ,λ1 ∩ ASC2 ,λ2 = (AS ⊗ 11,λ1 ⊗ 12,λ2 ) .
                                    AH                                                                                         (5.28)
                                                H



                                                                  46
That is, Alice and Bob can again only compare internal relational observables of S and, as before,
when AS is a Type III1 von Neumann factor on which the modular Hamiltonian HS acts ergodically
(as in de Sitter space [21, 90]), then this overlap contains only c-numbers. It is also clear that this
conclusion carries over to physical representations of these algebras, similarly to Eq. (2.62).
   We noted in Sec. 2.7 that internal QRF perspectives Ri (τ ) are (direct sums/integrals of) TPSs on
the physical Hilbert space Hphys and that changing QRF changes such a TPS. Perspective maps Ri,λi
of degenerate clocks are similarly (direct sums/integrals of) TPSs, however, only on the corresponding
superselection sector Hλi ⊂ Hphys . Since changes from Alice’s to Bob’s clock are defined on intersections
Hλ1 ,λ2 = Hλ1 ∩Hλ2 , the clock change means that we switch from understanding the subsystem structure
of Hλ1 ,λ2 in terms of the TPS of its ambient space Hλ1 to understanding it in terms of the TPS of the
distinct ambient space Hλ2 .

5.2     Density operators
   In comparison to Sec. 4, each clock Ci is now assigned a label λi for its degeneracy sectors. Similarly
to Sec. 5.1.2, we can extend those results to include multiple degenerate clocks. For instance, the total
kinematical Hilbert space decomposes as
                                                            n
                                         Hkin = HS ⊗                Hiλi                             (5.29)
                                                           MO

                                                            Λ i=1

where Λ denotes the collection of degeneracy sector labels {λi } for all clocks. Through (5.8) per clock
this can alternatively be written as
                                                      n
                                       Hkin = HS ⊗          L2 (σi ) ⊗ Cmi                           (5.30)
                                                      O

                                                      i=1

Again, each factor Cmi may be viewed as a Hilbert space for a set of internal degrees of freedom of
clock Ci .
    As explained in Sec. 5.1.3, there are multiple subalgebras one can consider. In the rest of this
subsection we will explore what happens in the different cases. First, we will treat the case where there
is no superselection whatsoever. Then we will see what happens when all the clocks are subjected
to superselection. There are of course a multitude of intermediate cases where only some clocks are
superselected, but to avoid overcomplicating the narrative we will not explicitly study these. It is
straightforward to see how these intermediate cases mix the properties of two cases we study. Finally,
we will see what happens when we additionally restrict the sector of a particular clock.

5.2.1    No superselection
Let us first consider the case where there is no superselection. Then the algebra of observables for a
set of clocks R may then be written (without yet imposing gauge-invariance)

                                ASR = AS ⊗            B(L2 (σj )) ⊗ B(Cmj ).                         (5.31)
                                                O

                                              Cj ∈R

The gauge-invariant subalgebra may then be written (rearranging tensor factors for convenience)
                                                              H
                            SR = AS ⊗              B(L2 (σj ))                  B(Cmj ).             (5.32)
                                            O                           O
                           AH                                       ⊗
                                           Cj ∈R                        Cj ∈R

The first factor is equivalent to the algebra in the non-degenerate case, while the latter factor is just a
matrix algebra. The trace on the full AH  SR may be constructed as the tensor product of the traces on


                                                      47
the two tensor factors. Since the latter tensor factor is a finite Type I algebra, the Type of AH
                                                                                                SR is the
same as in the non-degenerate case, i.e. if R contains only a single clock of energy bounded below,
then AHSR is Type II1 , otherwise it is Type II∞ .

    As previously, the trace may be written as the expectation value in a state |Ψ⟩. This state may be
constructed like (4.12), except we have to additionally include maximally mixed states over two copies
of the multiplicity Hilbert spaces Cmj . Thus,
                                                                                               mj
                                                               −βHi /2
                                  |Ψ⟩ = |ψS ⟩ ⊗ |ψRī ⟩ ⊗ e                                                                        (5.33)
                                                                                             O X
                                                                               |0⟩i ⊗                   |λj ⟩j ⊗ |λj ⟩j ,
                                                                                         Cj ∈R λj =1

where |λj ⟩j , aλj = 1, . . . , mj is an orthonormal basis of Cmj labelling the degeneracy sectors. Let us
now set                                                        m                       j

                                         |ψSRī ⟩ = |ψS ⟩ ⊗ |ψRī ⟩ ⊗                                                              (5.34)
                                                                                    O X
                                                                                                 |λj ⟩j ⊗ |λj ⟩j ,
                                                                                Cj ∈Rī λj =1

so that                                                                                  mi
                                          |Ψ⟩ = |ψSRī ⟩ ⊗ e−βHi /2 |0⟩i ⊗                                                         (5.35)
                                                                                         X
                                                                                                 |λi ⟩i ⊗ |λi ⟩i .
                                                                                         λi =1


   One then finds that a relative Tomita operator for AH
                                                       SR from |Ψ⟩ to a physical state |ϕ) may be
written
                        XZ ∞
  Sϕ|Ψ = Πphys                         dt |t⟩i ⊗ |λi ⟩i Sϕ|i (0,λ′i )|ψSR ⟨0|i ⊗ λ′i i ⊗ ⟨λi |i
                                  −∞                                      ī
                        λi ,λ′i
                                                                                                                              
                                                                               exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )(t + iβ/2) , (5.36)
                                                                                                                     ī


Here, Sϕ|i (0,λ′i )|ψSR is a relative Tomita operator for
                            ī


                                               ARī S = AS ⊗               B(L2 (σj )) ⊗ B(Cmj ),                                  (5.37)
                                                                 O

                                                                Cj ∈Rī

from |ψSRī ⟩ to
                                             |ϕ|i (0, λ′i )⟩ = λ′i i Ri (0) |ϕ) = Ri,λ′i (0) |ϕ) .                                 (5.38)
As before, we may use (5.36) to deduce the density operator. One finds
                                         Z ∞
                                                               −1/2
 ρϕ =               e−S0,R Vi (iβ/2)           dt Vi (t)Oiτ (∆ψSR Sϕ† (τ +t,λ′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ,λi )|ψSR )Vi (iβ/2) ⊗ r λ′i ⟨λi | .
          X                                                                                                                          
                                                                               |i        i                                ī
                                          −∞                        ī                            ī
          λi ,λ′i
                                                                                             (5.39)
In computing the entropy of such a density operator, one would have to account for the correlations
between the different degeneracy sectors.

5.2.2      Superselection for all clocks
Suppose now that we are in a situation where superselection occurs for all the clocks, just like in
Sec. 5.1.3. This means that we are not allowed to act with operators which change the degeneracy
sectors of the clocks.
   In this case the gauge-invariant algebra of the QFT and a set of clocks R decomposes:

                                                             SR =                                                                  (5.40)
                                                                         M
                                                            AH                      AH
                                                                                     RS,ΛR ,
                                                                         ΛR



                                                                         48
where ΛR = {λi | Ci ∈ R}. Each AH  RS,ΛR is the gauge-invariant algebra within a degeneracy sector of
the clocks in R. Each AH
                       RS,ΛR is structurally equivalent to the algebra AH
                                                                        SR for non-degenerate clocks.

   Due to the degeneracy, AH SR is not a factor. However, each ARS,ΛR is a Type II factor, and thus
                                                                     H

has a unique trace up to a constant factor. For simplicity, we will choose this constant factor to be the
same in each sector, which amounts to imposing that the constant S0,R in (4.17) is sector-independent.
Then (4.17) defines the trace on the full algebra AH
                                                   SR .

   A direct sum of algebras of the same Type, also has that Type. Thus if R contains only a single
clock of energy bounded below, then AHSR is Type II1 , otherwise it is Type II∞ .

   The direct sum structure descends also to the physical Hilbert space:
                                                                       ΛR
                                                Hphys =                                                                          (5.41)
                                                                 M
                                                                      Hphys ,
                                                                 ΛR

Here for convenience we are choosing only to decompose relative to the degeneracy sector labels of R,
           λR
but each Hphys  may of course be further decomposed relative to the degeneracy sector labels of Rc .
                                                                ΛR
Each AH
      RS,λR has a physical representation r(ARS,λR ) acting on Hphys .
                                             H


   The point now is that we can exploit this direct sum structure to compute the density operator
sector by sector. In particular, let us decompose the physical state as
                                                      Xq
                                              |ϕ) =              pΛR |ϕΛR ) ,                                                    (5.42)
                                                      ΛR

                                            ΛR
where pΛR ≥ 0 is chosen such that |ϕΛR ) ∈ Hphys is normalised. Explicitly, we have
                                                                                 1
                          pΛR = (ϕ| ΠΛR |ϕ) ,          and            |ϕΛR ) = p     ΠΛR |ϕ)                                     (5.43)
                                                                                p ΛR


where ΠΛR = Ci ∈R Πλi is the projector onto the ΛR degeneracy sector. Then, working sector by
               N

sector, the density matrix corresponding to |ϕ) is given by

                                              ρϕ =           pΛR ΠΛR ρΛ                                                          (5.44)
                                                      X
                                                                       R
                                                                      ϕ ,
                                                      ΛR

where
                               Z ∞
                                                     −1/2                                                      −1/2
     ρϕΛR = e−S0,R Vi (iβ/2)         dt Vi (t)Oiτ (∆ψSR S † ΛR                       SϕΛR (τ )|ψ              ∆ψSR )Vi (iβ/2).   (5.45)
                               −∞                       ī       ϕ|i (τ +t)|ψSR         |i          SR
                                                                                                         ī        ī
                                                                                ī

Here,
                                             |ϕΛ
                                               |i (τ )⟩ = Ri (τ ) |Φ
                                                 R                  ΛR
                                                                       )                                                         (5.46)
is the state in the perspective of Ci , in the ΛR sector.
   The entropy may now similarly be decomposed sector by sector. Indeed, we have
                                                                                            
                                     log ρϕ =        ΠΛR log pΛR + log ρΛ                                                        (5.47)
                                                X
                                                                          R
                                                                        ϕ   ,
                                                ΛR

which implies that

                      S[ϕ] = − (ϕ| log ρϕ |ϕ) = −                 pΛR log pΛR +                  pΛR S ΛR [ϕ],                   (5.48)
                                                           X                            X

                                                           ΛR                           ΛR

where S ΛR [ϕ] = − (ϕΛR | log ρΛ
                               ϕ |ϕ
                                 R  ΛR ) is the entropy in the Λ sector. The first term on the right
                                                                R
hand side above is a Shannon entropy for the probability distribution of the sectors, while the second
term is the entropy averaged over the sectors.

                                                             49
   To go further with the computation of the entropy amounts to evaluating S ΛR [ϕ]. However, within
each sector this is just equivalent to evaluating the entropy in the non-degenerate case. Thus, the
entropy in the superselecting case may be computed by applying non-degenerate arguments sector by
sector, and then applying (5.48).

5.2.3     Fixing the sector for one clock
Let us suppose we fix the sector of a single clock Ci to λi . This amounts to restricting to the Hilbert
space
                                    Πλi Hkin = HS ⊗ Hiλi ⊗                                        (5.49)
                                                              O
                                                                 Hj .
                                                                       j̸=i

Similarly, the algebra of operators (in both the no superselection and superselection cases) is restricted
to Πλi AHSR Πλi . The trace on this algebra may be simply constructed as the restriction of the trace
on the original larger algebra AH SR . Similarly, if ρ is the density operator on the larger algebra then
Πλi ρΠλi is the density operator on the restricted algebra.
   Thus, we can straightforwardly write down the density operator in either of the two cases, using
the previous results (5.39) and (5.44). In the case of no superselection for the other clocks, we obtain:
                                    Z ∞
                                                         −1/2
        ρϕ = e−S0,R Πλi Vi (iβ/2)         dt Vi (t)Oiτ (∆ψSR Sϕ† (τ +t,λi )|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ,λi )|ψSR )Vi (iβ/2).   (5.50)
                                                                  |i                           ī
                                    −∞                       ī                ī



  In the case of superselection, we simply restrict the sum in (5.44) to those ΛR consistent with λi .
The ρΛ
     ϕ are still given by (5.45).
      R




6     Semiclassical regime
   In the preceding sections we have worked out explicit expressions for density operators associated
with a variety of gauge-invariant subalgebras in the presence of a variety of types of clock frames. We
now turn to the computation of entanglement entropies associated with such algebras. For a general
state |ϕ), it does not seem possible to go further than the implicit expression

                                      S[ϕ] = − ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| log ρϕ|i (τ ) |ϕ|i (τ )⟩                              (6.1)

for the entropy. To make progress we will first consider a restricted (but physically important) class of
states: those falling within a semiclassical regime defined by the following two assumptions. (We will
focus on the case of non-degenerate clocks, but the results of this section may be straightforwardly
generalised to the density operators for degenerate clocks given in Section 5.)
    • First, we assume that there is an ϵ > 0 such that for any a ∈ AS ⊗                   Cj ∈Rī B(HCj )
                                                                                        N


                               (ϕ|OC
                                   τ
                                     i
                                       (a)Vi (t)|ϕ) ≪ (ϕ|OC
                                                          τ
                                                            i
                                                              (a)|ϕ)           if |t| > O(ϵ).                   (6.2)

        In other words, the expectation values of dressed observables are peaked when no overall
        reorientation of Ci is being done. One can roughly speaking think of this as a condition that “the
        state |ϕ) is peaked around a particular orientation for Ci ”. Of course, unlike the above equation,
        this naïve statement is not gauge-invariant. The correct and more precise statement is that there
        is some degree of freedom (or collection of degrees of freedom) in the state |ϕ) which is capable
        of keeping track of reorientations of Ci , and which is peaked around ‘no reorientation’. This is
        easiest to see if we set a = 1; the above equation then means that reorienting the clock by a little
        bit ϵ results in an almost orthogonal state. Allowing a to be general means that this happens
        independently of the action of any dressed operators.

                                                           50
   • Second, consider the operator r(eiHS t ), i.e. the physical representation of evolution by the QFT
     Hamiltonian. Then we assume

                                             r(eiHS t ) |ϕ) ≈ eiEt |ϕ)        if |t| < O(ϵ),                        (6.3)

       for some constant
                                                           E = (ϕ|r(HS )|ϕ) .                                       (6.4)
       Thus, within times of O(ϵ), the QFT degrees of freedom only evolve by an overall phase. Put
       another way, the system is in an approximate eigenstate of HS (of course, it could also be an
       exact eigenstate of HS , such as the vacuum).
In combination, by (6.2) there is an effectively fixed time (the orientation of Ci ), which, by (6.3), acts
as a classical parameter on which the quantum state of the fields depends. This is why we call this a
semiclassical regime.
   An alternative formulation of these assumptions is as follows:

                                                    (∆HS )2ϕ ≪ (∆Hi )2ϕ ,                                           (6.5)

i.e. the variance of the QFT Hamiltonian is suppressed relative to the variance of the clock Hamiltonian.
Indeed, by the first assumption above we have (∆Hi )2ϕ ∼ 1/ϵ2 , and if we define

                                     η = ∥ϵ(r(HS ) − E) |ϕ)∥ = (∆Hi )−1
                                                                     ϕ (∆HS )ϕ ,                                    (6.6)

then the second assumption amounts to taking η ≪ 1, which reduces to (6.5). Another equivalent way
to state these assumptions is that the orientation of Ci must be sufficiently peaked that fluctuations in
the QFT Hamiltonian are suppressed.
   With these assumptions in place, we are basically allowed to ignore (in a controlled manner) the
QFT Hamiltonian HS in certain places, when computing the entropy S[ϕ]. To heuristically set the
stage for justifying this statement (and indeed for explaining what it means), consider the algebra
whose entropy we are computing:

                                   ARī S|Ci = {a, HS +             Hj | a ∈ AS ⊗ B(HRī )}.                        (6.7)
                                                             X

                                                             j̸=i

Suppose we were to remove HS from the right hand side. Then what we would end up with would
be a rather different algebra, which (since the modified reorientation operator would now commute
with field operators, and since the Hamiltonians of the frames in Rī may be absorbed into the B(HRī )
factor) can be written as

                       Ab = {a,           Hj | a ∈ AS ⊗ B(HRī )} = AS ⊗ B(HRī ) ⊗ {HRc }′′ .                      (6.8)
                                   X

                                   j̸=i

The approximation for the entropy S[ϕ] that we will give will have the interpretation of a kind of
entropy with respect to this algebra (but not a von Neumann entropy – indeed the algebra is Type III,
being the tensor product of the Type III algebra AS with some other algebra).
   Suppose we were to also take the formula (4.31) for the density operator in the perspective of Ci ,
and remove HS wherever it appears. We would end up with36
                                                           Z ∞
                                −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                          P
                                                                      i          Hj t †
                    ρ̂ϕ (τ ) = e                      ī         dt e     j̸=i       Sϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR ,      (6.9)
                                                            −∞                                  SR          ī
                                                                                                 ī




  36
    Here, in writing ρ̂ϕ (τ ) we leave off any remnant of the projector Π|i , because for reasons discussed in appendix D,
we can ignore this in the following discussion of the semiclassical entropy.


                                                                 51
where                                                            P
                                                            −i              Hj t
                                          |ϕ̂(τ + t)⟩ = e            j̸=i          |ϕ|i (τ )⟩                    (6.10)
is the state we would get by evolving the reduced state |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ with the ‘modified reorientation
operator’ j̸=i Hj . Under the semiclassical assumptions made above, it turns out that the entropy
          P

may be approximated as follows (a derivation is given in Appendix D):

                      S[ϕ] = − ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| log ρϕ|i (τ ) |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ≈ − ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| log ρ̂ϕ (τ ) |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ .          (6.11)

As alluded to above, the QFT Hamiltonian HS has more or less been eliminated from the right hand
side.
   Let us now consider the quantum information theoretic meaning of this approximate result. To
this end, consider the Hilbert space
                                        b = HS ⊗ HR ⊗ H∗ ⊗ L2 (σRc ).
                                        H                                                                        (6.12)
                                                   ī  Rī

This includes field degrees of freedom in HS , and degrees of freedom of two copies of the frames in Rī
— but it also contains an additional degree of freedom for the total energy of the frames in Rc . Any
element of Ab may be written as a AS ⊗ B(HRī ) valued function of HRc . Writing such an element as
a(HRc ) where a : σRc → AS ⊗ B(HRī ), we can define a faithful, normal representation of Ab on H  b as
follows:
                                  a(HRc )(|φ⟩ ⊗ |E⟩) = a(E) |φ⟩ ⊗ |E⟩ ,                          (6.13)
where |φ⟩ ∈ HS ⊗ HRī ⊗ HR   ∗ , operators are taken to act on the first copy of the frames in H
                              ī
                                                                                                 Rī and
|E⟩ is an energy E eigenstate in L (σRc ). It is easy to verify that the following (non-normalisable)
                                      2

state is cyclic/separating for this representation:
                                           O Z                             1
                                                                                                Z
                        |Ψ⟩
                         b = |ψS ⟩ ⊗                  dEj |Ej ⟩ ⊗ ⟨Ej | ⊗ √                           dE |E⟩ .   (6.14)
                                         Cj ∈Rī   σj                       2π                  σRc

The expectation value in this state gives a faithful normal weight on the algebra:
                                                        1
                                                                 Z
                       b :A
                       Ψ  b → C,            a(HRc ) 7→                      dE ⟨ψS | trRī (a(E)) |ψS ⟩ .        (6.15)
                                                       2π         σR c

This weight may be thought of as one in which the fields are in the KMS ‘vacuum’ |ψS ⟩, the frames in
Rī are maximally mixed, and the energy of the complementary frames Rc is uniformly distributed.
   In Appendix D, it is shown that the modular operator of |Ψ⟩   b is ∆ = e−βHS , and that moreover
                                                                        Ψ
                                                                        b
the relative modular operator from |Ψ⟩ to |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ is related to (6.9) by
                                    b

                                            ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                                                    b =e
                                                         S0,R +βHRc
                                                                    ρ̂ϕ (τ ).                                    (6.16)

Using these results in the formula for the entropy, we find

                  S[ϕ] ≈ S0,R + β ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| HRc |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ − ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| log ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                                                                               b |ϕ̂(τ )⟩                        (6.17)
                        = S0,R + β ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| (HS + HRc ) |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ + ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| log ∆Ψ
                                                                                 b |ϕ̂(τ ) |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ ,            (6.18)

where the second line holds when |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ is separating for the algebra above, and then follows from
log ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
            b = log ∆Ψ
                     b + log ∆ϕ̂(τ ) − log ∆Ψ
                                            b |ϕ̂(τ ) . The first term in this entropy formula reflects an overall
state-independent ambiguity, coming from the choice of normalisation in the trace. The second term
may be rewritten as the expectation of −βHR in the state |ϕ). The final term may be recognised as a
relative entropy between |Ψ⟩  b and |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ with respect to the algebra above. Overall, the entropy in
the semiclassical regime may be written

                                     S[ϕ] ≈ S0,R − β ⟨HR ⟩ϕ − Srel (ϕ̂(τ )||Ψ).
                                                                            b                                    (6.19)

                                                             52
6.1    Shannon entropy contribution from energy of complementary clocks
    The ‘effective’ algebra Ab represented in equation (6.8) has a non-trivial center generated by HRc ,
the total Hamiltonian of the complementary clocks. It turns out that the relative modular operator
∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
        b commutes with HRc , and thus may be decomposed as a direct integral over the eigenspaces of
HRc . This results in a contribution to the entropy S[ϕ] that takes the form of a classical Shannon
entropy for the probability distribution corresponding to measurements of HRc .
   More precisely, the projection-valued measure for measurements of HRc is P (E) dE, where
                                                                           1
                                                                                  Z ∞                   P
                                                                                              i(E−                              Hj )t
                            P (E) = δ E −                  Hj =                                                                         dt .            (6.20)
                                                       X
                                                                                                                Cj ∈Rc
                                                                  
                                                                                          e
                                                      Cj ∈Rc
                                                                          2π      −∞

From this, we may write down the Born probability distribution for measurements of HRc :
                                                      pE = ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| P (E) |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ .                                                                    (6.21)
Furthermore, the expectation values of operators a ∈ AS ⊗ B(HRī ) may be written
                                                                              Z
                                         ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| a |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ =                          dE pE ϕE (a),                                                   (6.22)
                                                                              σR c

where37
                                          pE ϕE (a) = ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| P (E)a |ϕ̂(τ )⟩                                                                          (6.23)
This functional ϕE defines a state on AS ⊗ B(HRī ), and it may be straightforwardly confirmed that
the relative modular operator from
                                                                      O Z
                                      |ψ̄⟩ = |ψS ⟩ ⊗                                   dEj |Ej ⟩ ⊗ ⟨Ej |                                                (6.24)
                                                                  Cj ∈Rī σj

to ϕE takes the form
                                                   1 −βHR∗ †
                                  ∆ϕE |ψ̄ =          e   ī S
                                                             ϕ̂(τ )|ψSR
                                                                          P (E)Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR .                                                            (6.25)
                                                  pE                   ī                 ī

Note that ψ̄ is the tensor product of the QFT KMS state |ψS ⟩ with a maximally mixed state for the
frames in Rī .
   Using the identity
                                                                                                            iHR t
                                      Sϕ̂(τ +t)|ψSR = e−iHRc t Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR e                                           ī   ,                           (6.26)
                                                           ī                                          ī

we may also write
                                                       Z ∞
                                       −βHR∗
                                                                          P
                                                                      i           Hj t †
                        ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                                b =e             ī             dt e       j̸=i       Sϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR                                           (6.27)
                                              −∞                                                 SR          ī   ī
                                             Z ∞
                                       −βH ∗                                †
                                  =e                            dt eiHRc t Sϕ̂(τ                      eiHRc t Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR                               (6.28)
                                             R
                                                 ī
                                                        −∞                       )|ψ        SR                                            ī
                                                                                                 ī
                                         Z
                                                                          −βHR ∗         †
                                  = 2π                 dE P (E)e                  ī    Sϕ̂(τ )|ψ
                                                                                                                P (E)Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR .                      (6.29)
                                          σR c                                                        SR                                           ī
                                                                                                        ī

Recognising the integrand as P (E)pE ∆ϕE |ψ̄ , and using the facts that the integrand commutes with
HRc , and P (E)P (E ′ ) = δ(E − E ′ )P (E), we may write
                                             Z                                                             
                           log ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                                       b =            dE P (E) log 2πpE ∆ϕE |ψ̄                                                                         (6.30)
                                                                   Z                                                                          
                                         = log(2π) +                      dE P (E) log pE + log ∆ϕE |ψ̄ .                                               (6.31)


  37
     Here we are assuming for simplicity that pE ̸= 0 for all E ∈ σRc . It is straightforward to account for the case where
this does not hold, by simply excluding values of E for which pE = 0 in the following arguments.


                                                                          53
Substituting this into the entropy formula, we find
                                                      Z                            Z
  S[ϕ] ≈ S0,R − log(2π) + β ⟨ϕ̂(τ )|HRc |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ −              dE pE log pE −               dE pE ϕE (log ∆ϕE |ψ̄ ). (6.32)
                                                          σRc                          σRc

The third term appearing above is the promised Shannon entropy of HRc . In the case that ϕE is
separating for AS ⊗ B(HRī ), we may rewrite the final term in terms of relative entropies as we have
done previously. The result is
                                                      Z                            Z
            S[ϕ] ≈ S0,R − log(2π) − β ⟨HR ⟩ϕ −                  dE pE log pE −               dE pE Srel (ϕE ||ψ̄).        (6.33)
                                                       σRc                         σRc

The final term now readily can be identified as the relative entropy from ψ̄ of the state ϕE , averaged
over E, according to the probability distribution pE . The structure of this formula is reminiscent of
the entropies in [169, 170], as is to be expected for algebras with non-trivial center.

6.2   Generalised entropy
    By arguing as in [24], one may view (6.19) as a kind of gravitational generalised entropy, with an
expected area term. However, our formula holds more generally than has been previously considered.
First, we are allowing the state |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ to be arbitrarily entangled between the QFT and the clocks
(insofar as this is compatible with the semiclassical assumptions above), whereas for example [21, 24]
considered only the case where |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ factorises as a product state between the QFT and the clocks.
Second, we are computing the entropy one gets with respect to arbitrary subsets R of clocks (whereas
previously only a single clock has been involved). The resulting entropy then in fact differs from the
generalised entropy, depending on which clocks R we use. To see this, let us proceed with a rough
outline of the arguments of [24]; for further details of the assumptions involved we refer the reader to
that paper. We introduce some kind of UV regulator on the fields, such that the QFT algebra AS is
no longer Type III. Then Ab itself is no longer Type III, which means that it has well-defined density
operators for states (and weights). In terms of these density operators, the modular and relative
modular operators factorise as follows:
                                            ′ −1                               ′ −1
                                  ∆Ψ
                                   b = ρΨ
                                        b (ρ b ) ,              ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                                                                        b = ρ(ρ b ) .                                     (6.34)
                                             Ψ                                 Ψ

Here ρΨ
      b and ρ are the UV regulated density operators of Ψ and ϕ̂ respectively, while ρ b is the UV
                                                        b                             ′
                                                                                                                      Ψ
regulated density operator of Ψb with respect to the commutant of A.  b Since ∆ = e−βHS we can
                                                                                  Ψ
                                                                                  b
determine these operators in terms of HS . As specified at the beginning of Section 4, HS is the
generator of a diffeomorphism acting on the fields, and as such may be written in terms of the energy
momentum tensor of the fields T ab as follows:
                                                  Z                                            Z
             HS = Hξ − Hξ′ ,      where Hξ =              dΣa ξb T ab    and Hξ′ = −                  dΣa ξb T ab .       (6.35)
                                                   Σ                                             Σ′

Here, Σ, Σ′ are Cauchy surfaces for U and its causal complement U ′ , and ξ is the vector field
corresponding to the diffeomorphism generated by HS . Thus we may write
                                                                          ′
                                           e−βHξ                  ′   e−βHξ
                                      ρΨ =       ,               ρb =       ,                                             (6.36)
                                       b    Zξ                    Ψ    Zξ
where we have introduced a normalisation constant Zξ . We thus have

                                    log ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ = log ρ + βHξ′ + log Zξ .                                               (6.37)

Using this in (6.17), one finds

               S[ϕ] ≈ S0,R − log Zξ + β ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| (HRc − Hξ′ ) |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ − ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| log ρ |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ .                        (6.38)

                                                           54
We may use the freedom in the factor e−S0,R appearing in the trace (4.17) to set S0,R = log Zξ , thus
eliminating the first two terms. The last term is the (UV regulated) von Neumann entropy SAb[ϕ̂(τ )]
of the state |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ with respect to the algebra A,
                                                   b i.e. of the fields in U, the frames R , and the
                                                                                          ī
complementary frame energy HRc . To address the middle term, we use the conjecture of [24] that ξ
essentially behaves as a boost near the boundary of U, from which it follows that
                                                                             A
                                              βHξ′ = βHRout −                                                     (6.39)
                                                                            4GN
is a constraint in the gravitational theory. Here, HRout = Cj ∈Rout Hj is the total Hamiltonian of all
                                                                             P

the frames Rout outside U, while A is the area of the boundary of Σ, i.e. the codimension 2 corner of U,
and GN is Newton’s constant. Note that under our present assumptions, Rc and Rout need not be the
same set of clocks. Putting this all together (and using also the fact that HRc − HRout = HRin − HR ,
where HRin is the total Hamiltonian of the frames inside of U), we get

                                         A
                                             
                           S[ϕ] ≈                          + SAb[ϕ̂(τ )] − β ⟨HRin − HR ⟩ϕ .                      (6.40)
                                        4GN       ϕ̂(τ )

Thus, we obtain something very much like a gravitational generalised entropy, with a couple of
frame-dependent caveats. The most obvious caveat is in the final term, which gives the difference in
energies between the frames located in U, and the frames making up the set R. This term disappears
in the case R = Rin , although of course the above formula holds more generally than this. The other
caveat is that the second term is not just an entropy of the QFT, but also of the frames. As such, it is
sensitive to the way in which the frames are entangled with each other, and with the QFT.

6.3     Special case: separable QFT and frames
   A special case occurs when the state |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ is approximately separable between the fields and the
frames:
              |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ ≈ |ϕS (τ )⟩ ⊗ |ϕ̃(τ )⟩ , where |ϕS (τ )⟩ ∈ HS , |ϕ̃(τ )⟩ ∈ HRī ⊗ HRc .   (6.41)

   Our results apply in the presence of arbitrary entanglement, but previous works such as [21, 24]
exclusively employed states of this product form in the semiclassical limit. However, even though the
semiclassical assumptions restrict the kind of entanglement allowed, such product states (6.41) only
make up a small subset of the full set of semiclassical states, for which generically the fields and the
frames will be non-trivially entangled. In the interest of making contact with these earlier papers, let
us show how our results specialize to the case (6.41).
   In a product state, the relative entropy term in the entropy may be further decomposed into
contributions from |ϕS (τ )⟩ and |ϕ̃(τ )⟩. Indeed, the state |Ψ⟩
                                                              b is also separable, which allows us to
decompose the relative modular operator as

                                        ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                                                b ≈ ∆ϕS (τ )|ψS ⊗ ∆ϕ̃(τ )|Ψ
                                                                          e,                                      (6.42)

where                               O Z                             1
                                                                                        Z
                          |Ψ⟩
                           e =                 dEj |Ej ⟩ ⊗ ⟨Ej | ⊗ √                           dE |E⟩ .           (6.43)
                                  Cj ∈Rī   σj                       2π                  σRc

We can explicitly confirm this by using a decomposition as in (4.33) to write

                   ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                           b =e
                                S0,R +βHRc
                                           ρ̂ϕ (τ )                                                               (6.44)
                                                  Z ∞              P
                                                               i           Hj t
                            ≈ ∆ϕS (τ )|ψS ⊗                 dt e    j̸=i          trRc ( |ϕ̃(τ + t)⟩ ⟨ϕ̃(τ )|),   (6.45)
                                                    −∞



                                                               55
and we may identify the latter factor as ∆ϕ̃(τ )|Ψ
                                                 e . Actually, it may be confirmed that taking expectation
values in |Ψ⟩
           e gives a trace on B(HR ) ⊗ {HRc }′′ (although certainly not the only one since this is not a
                                       ī
factor). Since ∆ϕ̃(τ )|Ψ
                       e is an element   of this algebra, it is thus actually the density operator of the state
|ϕ̂(τ )⟩ with respect to this trace and algebra. We write this as ρϕ,Rī (τ ) = ∆ϕ̃(τ )|Ψ
                                                                                        e to denote that it is
the density operator of the frames. Using these results in the formula for the entropy (6.19), one finds

                   S[ϕ] ≈ S0,R + β ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| HRc |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ − ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| log ∆ϕS (τ )|ψS |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ + SR [ϕ]                                         (6.46)
                            = S0,R − β ⟨HR ⟩ϕ − Srel (ϕS (τ )||ψS ) + SR [ϕ],                                                                 (6.47)

where the second line holds if |ϕS (τ )⟩ is separating with respect to AS , and

                                             SR [ϕ] = − ⟨ϕ̃(τ )| log ρϕ,Rī (τ ) |ϕ̃(τ )⟩                                                     (6.48)

is the entropy of the frames.
    It should be noted that SR [ϕ], as written above, appears to depend on a choice of Ci ∈ R – but it
is actually independent of this choice, to leading order in the semiclassical approximation. To see this,
consider the (Type I) algebra

                                 r(B(HR )H ) = {OC
                                                 τ
                                                   i
                                                     (a), Vi (t) | a ∈ B(HRī ), t ∈ R}′′ ,                                                   (6.49)

which acts at the perspective-neutral level. On the right-hand side, we have decomposed this algebra
with respect to a particular Ci ∈ R, but clearly the algebra itself is independent of the choice of Ci .
By the semiclassical and separability assumptions, the expectation value of a general element of this
algebra may be approximated as:
                                                           P                                                       P
                                                       i              Hj t                                     i          Hj t
      (ϕ| OC
           τ
             i
               (a)Vi (t) |ϕ) = ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| aeiHS t e            j̸=i          |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ≈ ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| aeiEt e       j̸=i          |ϕ|i (τ )⟩   (6.50)
                        P
                    i         H t
The operators ae j̸=i j span the algebra B(HRī )⊗{HRc }′′ . Thus the density operator for r(B(HR )H )
may be obtained by pulling back the density operator ρϕ,Rī (τ ) for B(HRī ) ⊗ {HRc }′′ through the
homomorphism                                                 P
                                                        iEt i j̸=i Hj t
                                 OC τ
                                      i
                                        (a)V i (t) ↔ ae    e            .                       (6.51)
One obtains                      Z ∞                                                                                      
                        ρϕ,R =           dt e−iEt r(e−iHR t )OC
                                                              τ
                                                                i
                                                                  trSRc (e−iHRc t |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ|i (τ )|) .                                    (6.52)
                                    −∞

Moreover, the von Neumann entropies of the density operators ρϕ,R and ρϕ,Rī (τ ) will be approximately
equal. Now,
                                                                                                                                
                 τ
                OC i
                     trSRc (e−iHRc t |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ|i (τ )|) = trSRc (OC
                                                                      τ
                                                                        i
                                                                          e−iHRc t |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| ),                                   (6.53)

and
                                                                                                                                    
         τ
        OC i
             e−iHRc t |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| = OC
                                               τ
                                                 i
                                                   e−iHRc t Vj→i (τ, τ ) |ϕ|j (τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ|j (τ )| Vj→i (τ, τ )†                                  (6.54)
                                                                                                                                      
                                                  = OC
                                                     τ
                                                       i
                                                         Vj→i (τ, τ )e−iHRc t |ϕ|j (τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ|j (τ )| Vj→i (τ, τ )†                             (6.55)
                                                                                                 
                                                  = OC
                                                     τ
                                                       j
                                                         e−iHRc t |ϕ|j (τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ|j (τ )|                                                       (6.56)

for any Cj ∈ R, so ρϕ,R is independent of the choice of Ci . Therefore, SR [ϕ], which was above
formulated as the von Neumann entropy of ρϕ,Rī [ϕ] in (6.48), may be alternatively formulated as the
von Neumann entropy of ρϕ,R , which is independent of the choice of Ci .



                                                                          56
   Note also that the Shannon entropy of HRc is contained within the frame entropy SR [ϕ]. Indeed,
one may decompose the frame density operator as follows:
                                                Z ∞                 P
                                                                i           Hj t
                            ρϕ,Rī (τ ) =                 dt e       j̸=i          trRc ( |ϕ̃(τ + t)⟩ ⟨ϕ̃(τ )|)             (6.57)
                                                 −∞
                                                Z ∞
                                            =             dt eiHRc t trRc (e−iHRc t |ϕ̃(τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ̃(τ )|)                      (6.58)
                                                  −∞
                                                     Z
                                            ≈ 2π                dE P (E)pE ρRī ,E ,                                        (6.59)
                                                         HR c

where
                                  pE = ⟨ϕ̂(τ )|P (E)|ϕ̂(τ )⟩ ≈ ⟨ϕ̃(τ )|P (E)|ϕ̃(τ )⟩                                        (6.60)
is the probability distribution of HRc , and

                                           pE ρRī ,E = trRc (P (E) |ϕ̃(τ )⟩ ⟨ϕ̃(τ )|).                                     (6.61)

Note that ρRī ,E is the reduced density operator of the frames in Rī , conditioned on the energy of the
frames in Rc being E. Using this decomposition, one finds
                                       Z
                        SR [ϕ] = −              dE ⟨ϕ̃(τ )| P (E) log(2πpE ρR,E ) |ϕ̃(τ )⟩                                  (6.62)
                                       σRc
                                                          Z                                 Z
                                = − log(2π) −                       dE pE log pE +                 dE pE SRī ,E [ϕ],       (6.63)
                                                           σR c                              σRc

where                                                                                             
                                            SRī ,E [ϕ] = − trRī ρRī ,E log ρRī ,E                                       (6.64)
is the entanglement entropy of the frames in Rī , conditioned on HRc = E. Thus the total frame
entropy SR [ϕ] contains a term corresponding to the Shannon entropy of HRc , as well as an average of
HRc -conditioned entanglement entropies of the frames in Rī .
   After UV regularisation, an approximate product state of the form (6.41) has an approximate
product density operator ρ = ρS ⊗ ρϕ,Rī (τ ), where ρS is the density operator of the fields in U, and
ρϕ,R (τ ) is the density operator of the frames. The term SAb[ϕ̂(τ )] in the generalised entropy (6.40) then
may be written as the sum of the von Neumann entropies of these two density operators, and one finds
                                      A
                                           
                        S[ϕ] ≈                           + SQFT [ϕ̂(τ )] + SR [ϕ] − β ⟨HRin − HR ⟩ϕ .                       (6.65)
                                     4GN        ϕ̂(τ )


Here SQFT [ϕ̂(τ )] is the von Neumann entropy of ρS , i.e. the entanglement entropy of the fields in U.
One may observe that the frame dependence of this formula has been entirely relegated to the final
two terms.

6.4     Linear order correction and entanglement
   All of the formulas for the entropy discussed above hold to leading order in the semiclassical
approximation; at higher orders in η there are corrections to these formulas. In Appendix D.1, it is
shown that, to O(η), the entropy receives corrections of the following form:

                                                         1                                   1
                    Z            Z ∞                                                                                    !
                                                                                                      
 S[ϕ] = S0 [ϕ]−2π          dE          dλ ϕE                     (HS − E)∂E pE ∆ϕE |ψ̄               +O η 2 , (6.66)
                     σRc         0                   λ + ∆ϕE |ψ̄                         λ + ∆ϕE |ψ̄

where S0 [ϕ] is the leading order contribution discussed above, and pE , ϕE , ψ̄ were defined in Section 6.1.



                                                                        57
   The nature of this linear order correction is a little difficult to decipher from this expression. To get
something a bit easier to digest, let us introduce again a UV regulator on the fields as in Subsec. 6.2,
such that all algebras have well-defined density operators. Then we can write

                                                     ∆ϕE |ψ̄ = ρE (ρ′ψ̄ )−1 ,                                          (6.67)

where ρE is the density operator for ϕE in the algebra AS ⊗ B(HRī ), and ρ′ψ̄ is the density operator
                                                                                     ′
for ψ̄ in its complement; as in Subsec. 6.2, we have ρ′ψ̄ = e−βHξ /Zξ . With this decomposition, it is
shown in Appendix D.1 that one may perform the λ integral in (6.66) to obtain
                             Z          h                                                          i         
       S[ϕ] = S0 [ϕ] − 2π            dE ∂E pE ϕE (Hξ ) − E               − pE ϕE Hξ′ ∂E log (pE ρE )        + O η2 .   (6.68)
                               σRc

Thus, the linear order correction depends in a non-trivial way on the correlations between the energies
of the QFT degrees of freedom and the complementary clocks, and other statistical properties of the
state.
   In the special case in Subsec. 6.3, the state is assumed to exactly factorise between the QFT and
clocks, as in (6.41). We then have that ϕE factorises as ϕE = ϕS ⊗ ϕ̃E , where ϕS is the state on AS
given by
                                       ϕS (a) = ⟨ϕS (τ )| a |ϕS (τ )⟩ ,                         (6.69)
and ϕ̃E is the frames part of the state, conditioned on the complementary frame energy being E.
Similarly, with a UV cutoff in place, the density operator factorises ρE = ρS ⊗ ρ̃E , with ρS ∈ AS and
ρ̃E ∈ B(HRī ). The integrand in (6.68) may then be written38

                                                     ϕS (HS − E) ∂E pE .                                               (6.70)

But the first factor on the right hand side vanishes by the definition of E = ϕ(HS ) = ϕS (HS ). So the
linear order correction to the entropy vanishes, if we use a UV regulator. Because the QFT algebra is
hyperfinite, this continues to be true even without the UV regulator.39 Thus there are no linear order
corrections for a separable state of the form considered in Subsec. 6.3. This is in agreement with [27].
    On the other hand, if the state is non-trivially entangled, there will generically be a non-zero linear
correction. To make this a bit more obvious, let us assume that pE vanishes at the boundary of σRc
(this is compatible with the semiclassical assumptions; indeed, if σRc = R, then a normalisable state
requires this assumption to hold). Then the first term in (6.68) can be integrated and seen to vanish.
Let’s also assume the state is such that ρE is independent of E. Then, integrating by parts, one may
verify that                                   Z                                              
                                  S[ϕ] = S0 [ϕ] − 2π              dE pE ∂E ϕE (Hξ′ ) + O η 2 .                         (6.71)
                                                           σR c

Now note that ϕE (Hξ′ ) can now depend arbitrarily on E, so long as
                                                     Z
                                                E=         dE pE ϕE (Hξ − Hξ′ ).                                       (6.72)
                                                     σRc

The semiclassical approximation remains valid if ∂E ϕE (Hξ′ ) = O(η) (so that the second term in (6.71)
is O(η)). Clearly, these conditions allow for a non-zero contribution at linear order.


  38
       To show this one needs to use ϕ̃E (∂E log ρ̃E ) = 0.
  39
     Indeed, the von Neumann entropy is a relative entropy with respect to the trace, and the relative entropy on a
hyperfinite algebra is the limit of the relative entropies on its approximating algebras [155] (which are the UV regulated
algebras in this case).


                                                                  58
    One may thus in principle use the linear order part of the entropy as a diagnostic for whether there
is entanglement between the QFT and clocks. It should also be noted that for non-ideal clocks, exactly
factorizing states are much harder to come by, due to the non-trivial projection operator Π|i defining
the reduced Hilbert space. In any case we should typically expect linear corrections to the entropy.

6.5      Comparison with previous work
   At this stage, we may directly specialise our entropy formula to the states studied in [21, 24]. As
described in Section 4.4, in those works there were only two clocks C1 , C2 present. In the perspective
of one of the clocks (without loss of generality C1 ) a product state of the form

                                                   |ϕ|1 (τ )⟩ = |ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |f2 ⟩                                            (6.73)

was assumed, where |ϕS ⟩ ∈ HS and |f ⟩ ∈ H2 . The entropies of the algebras r(AH
                                                                               SC1 ) and r(ASC2 )
                                                                                            H

where then studied.
   It was also assumed in [21, 24] that the energy wavefunction f2 (E) = ⟨E|2 |f2 ⟩ of the clock C2 is
slowly varying as a function of E. This implies that its time wavefunction f˜2 (t) = ⟨t|2 |f2 ⟩ is rapidly
varying. Changing to the perspective of clock C2 , we have
                                                     Z ∞
                                      |ϕ|2 (τ )⟩ =         dt f˜2 (t)eiHS t |ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |−t⟩1 .                              (6.74)
                                                     −∞

Another assumption of [21, 24] was that HS approximately commutes with the relative modular
Hamiltonian from ψS to ϕS . For us, this translates to our second semiclassical assumption, that
|ϕS ⟩ is in an approximate eigenstate of HS , i.e. eiHS t |ϕS ⟩ ≈ eiEt |ϕS ⟩. To be a bit more precise
about the nature of the wavefunction f˜2 (t), we are assuming that it is rapidly varying enough that
this approximate HS eigenstate assumption is reliable in integrals of the above form. Alternatively
expressed in terms of energies, the assumption is that the variance of H2 is much larger than the
variance of HS . We can then write
                                                                               Z ∞
                         |ϕ|2 (τ )⟩ ≈ |ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |f1 ⟩ ,      where     |f1 ⟩ =         dt f˜2 (t)eiEt |−t⟩1 .              (6.75)
                                                                               −∞

Thus, we see that the assumption of approximate separability applies to the state in the perspective of
both C1 and C2 . Note that the energy wavefunctions of the two clocks are related by
                                                        Z ∞
                               f1 (E) = ⟨E|1 |f1 ⟩ =            dt f˜2 (t)ei(E+E)t = f2 (E + E)                          (6.76)
                                                           −∞

(we set f1,2 (E) = 0 if E ̸∈ σ1,2 ). So f1 (E) is also slowly varying.
   The first part of our semiclassical assumption can now be seen to apply to either clock. Indeed, for
any a ∈ AS ,
                                                                                        Z
      (ϕ| OC
           τ
             i
               (a)Vi (t) |ϕ) ≈ ⟨ϕS | aeiHS t |ϕS ⟩ ⟨fj | eiHj t |fj ⟩ ≈ ⟨ϕS | a |ϕS ⟩          dE |fj (E)|2 ei(E+E)t ,   (6.77)
                                                                                         σCj


where (i, j) ∈ {(1, 2), (2, 1)}. Due to fj (E) being slowly varying, the right hand side is sharply peaked
at t = 0, as required. Thus, both of our semiclassical assumptions are satisfied, and we can apply the
semiclassical entropy formulae.
  In particular, the entropy of the algebra r(AH
                                               SCi ) may be written (invoking (6.47) and (6.63), using
                          2
HR = Hj so pE = |fj (E)| , and noting Rī = ∅)
  c



                              S[ϕ] ≈ S0,Ci − β ⟨Hi ⟩ϕ − Srel (ϕS ||ψS ) − log(2π) + Sobs ,                               (6.78)

                                                                59
where                       Z                                     Z
                 Sobs = −        dE |fi (E)|2 log |fi (E)|2 = −         dE |fj (E)|2 log |fj (E)|2   (6.79)
                            σi                                     σj

(the second equality holds because of (6.76)). In the case where the spectrum of Ci is bounded
below, the algebra is Type II1 , and we may normalise the trace such that Tr(1) = 1; as described in
Section 4.1, this amounts to fixing the constant S0,Ci such that it obeys (4.24). In the particular case
that the spectrum is of the form σi = [0, ∞), we have S0,Ci = log β + log(2π). Writing Hi = Hobs , we
then have
                           S[ϕ] ≈ −β ⟨Hobs ⟩ϕ − Srel (ϕS ||ψS ) + Sobs + log β,                   (6.80)
which agrees with, for example, [24, Eq. (5.30)].


7    Antisemiclassical regime
   In the previous section, we described a semiclassical regime in which the fluctuations of a given
clock Ci are much smaller than the fluctuations of the QFT. In this regime, the von Neumann entropy
for the algebra of r(AH
                      SR ) was shown to agree with the expected gravitational generalised entropy
formula (after imposing a UV cutoff).
    However, this semiclassical regime only concerns a very small corner of the Hilbert space. For most
physical states, the clocks will fluctuate to roughly the same degree as the fields. The generalised
entropy formula (6.40) should not be expected to hold non-semiclassically, but it is interesting to ask
how to extrapolate it away from this regime. In Subsec. 6.4, we described how the entropy changes at
linear order away from the semiclassical regime.
    In contrast, in this section we will describe a regime which is very far away from the semiclassical
one. In particular, we will consider states for which the fluctuations of the time of Ci are much larger
than the fluctuations of the other degrees of freedom. This is precisely the opposite of the semiclassical
case, and for this reason we call this the ‘antisemiclassical’ regime. Since the time of the clock is
fluctuating so much, it turns out to be of rather little use for making observations of the other degrees
of freedom (we make this more precise below). This enables a simplification of the entropy formula –
but a different simplification to the semiclassical one.
   Thus, in this paper we will have described two regimes, semiclassical and antisemiclassical. It would
be very useful to understand how to interpolate between them, a task we leave to future work.
   As in the case of the semiclassical regime, we can more precisely define the antisemiclassical regime by
examining expectation values of operators in the algebra. In particular, let a ∈ AU ⊗ Cj ∈Rī B(HCj ),
                                                                                          N

and consider the expectation value of OC     τ (a)V (t). The antisemiclassical assumption is that this
                                               i    i
expectation value is well-approximated by taking |ϕ) to be an approximate eigenstate of the clock
Hamiltonian r(Hi ), with energy Ē:

                                (ϕ|OC
                                    τ
                                      i
                                        (a)Vi (t)|ϕ) ≈ e−iĒt F (t) (ϕ|OC
                                                                        τ
                                                                          i
                                                                            (a)|ϕ) .                  (7.1)

Here, F (t) is some real (at leading order we can absorb any phase of F (t) into the e−iĒt term)
slowly varying function of t, reflecting the fact that |ϕ) is not an exact eigenstate. Since |ϕ) is in an
approximate eigenstate of r(Hi ), the time read by the clock has very large fluctuations, as required.
Note that if we set a = 1, and consider the complex conjugate of both sides in combination with
t → −t, we can observe that F (t) = F (−t).
   There has to be a timescale involved in the above assumption; it turns out to be given by β. In
particular, we assume that (7.1) holds for t < β, and that for t > β the left hand side of (7.1) is very
close to vanishing. This timescale will be required to obtain a simplified entropy formula.

                                                        60
  Recall that the semiclassical regime can be understood as applying when the fluctuations of the
QFT Hamiltonian are sufficiently suppressed relative to those of the clock Hamiltonian, as in (6.5).
The antisemiclassical regime will hold when instead

                                                                           (∆Hi )2ϕ ≪ β −2 .                                                                                        (7.2)

Thus, the fluctuations of the clock Hamiltonian should be less than thermal vacuum fluctuations of
the QFT Hamiltonian.
   The assumption (7.1) then implies that

                                         Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ≈ eiĒt F (t)∆ϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ,                                                                                  (7.3)
                                               |i               ī                           ī                                                ī


as can be confirmed by considering matrix elements of both sides in between states of the form a for
a ∈ AU ⊗ Cj ∈Rī B(HCj ), and using the fact that |ψSRī ⟩ is cyclic.
          N

   Using this in (4.31), we find
                                                                          −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                          ρϕ|i (τ ) ≈ Π|i e                                                 ī    W ∆ϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ,                                                 (7.4)
                                                                                                                                          ī

where                     Z ∞                         P                                            Z ∞                          P
                                         i(HS +                Hj +Ē)t                                                 −i(HS +            Hj )t
               W =              dt e                    j̸=i                 F (t) =                       dt e                    j̸=i                 (ϕ|Vi (t)|ϕ) .              (7.5)
                          −∞                                                                          −∞
Due to the slowly varying nature of F (t), the support of W is sharply peaked around states for which
HS + j̸=i Hj + Ē = 0.
     P

   Note that ∆ϕ|i (τ )|ψSR is approximately gauge-invariant; indeed
                                   ī
                          P                                                                                P
               i(HS +               Hj +Ē)t                                                      i(HS +                 Hj )t †
              e             j̸=i                    F (t)∆ϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ≈ e                                       j̸=i         Sϕ (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR                           (7.6)
                                                                                  ī                                             |i                      ī
                                                                                                                                                        ī
                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                    i(HS +                 Hj )t
                                                                                       = Sϕ† (τ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ −t)|ψSR e                                             j̸=i            (7.7)
                                                                                                   |i              ī                      ī
                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                          i(HS +           Hj +Ē)t
                                                                                       ≈ ∆ϕ|i (τ )|ψSR e                            j̸=i                     F (t).                 (7.8)
                                                                                                                    ī


where to get the last line we used the Hermitian conjugate of (7.3) with t → −t. Thus, mapping back
to the perspective-neutral level, the density operator is given by ρR       ϕ = Ri (τ ) ρϕ|i (τ )Ri (τ ) = r(ρ̃ϕ ),
                                                                                         †                     R

where                                              Z ∞
                            −S0,R +β(HS +HR −HR∗ )
                      R
                    ρ̃ϕ ≈ e                    ī      dt eiHi t (ϕ|Vi (t)|ϕ) ∆ϕ|i (τ )|ψSR .               (7.9)
                                                                                        −∞                                                                     ī

This is the density operator of the system relative to a set of clocks R.
    At this stage let us consider two cases. Suppose first that R contains at least one other clock than
                                                                           R\C
Ci , and recall from Subsec. 4.3 that the corresponding density operator ρϕ i of the system relative to
the set of clocks R \ Ci may be found as the partial trace of ρR ϕ as follows:
                                                          h                              i
                  R\Ci
               ρϕ         = eS0,R −S0,R\Ci r tri (e−βHi ρ̃R
                                                          ϕ)                                                                                                                       (7.10)
                                                                                             Z ∞                                                   
                                −S0,R\C +β(HS +HR −HR∗ )
                          ≈e                                         ī      ī        tri                 dt eiHi t (ϕ|Vi (t)|ϕ) ∆ψ|i (τ )|ψSR .                                  (7.11)
                                                                                                      −∞                                                                     ī


Noting that               Z ∞                                                                   Z
                    tri                 dt eiHi t
                                                      (ϕ|Vi (t)|ϕ) = 2π                                  dE (ϕ|δ(r(Hi ) − E))|ϕ) = 2π,                                             (7.12)
                              −∞                                                                    σi
we can substitute (7.11) back into (7.9) to obtain
                                           1 S0,R\C −S0,R +βHi R\Ci
                                                                                                        Z ∞
                              ρR
                               ϕ ≈           e     i          ρϕ                                                 dt Vi (−t) (ϕ|Vi (t)|ϕ) .                                         (7.13)
                                          2π                                                             −∞


                                                                                             61
                                                                                              −1/2              −1/2
In the other case, where R contains only a single clock, we have that ∆ψ ∆ψ|i (τ )|ψS ∆ψ         is an
approximately gauge-invariant element of AS , and therefore (under the assumption that gauge
transformations act ergodically on AS ) at leading order a multiple of the identity. Moreover, its
                                                                 −1/2          −1/2
expectation value in the state |ψS ⟩ is 1 – so we must have ∆ψ ∆ψ|i (τ )|ψS ∆ψ      ≈ 1. Substituting
this in to (7.9) yields
                                  1 −S0,R +βHi ∞
                                                Z
                            R
                           ρϕ ≈      e               dt Vi (−t) (ϕ|Vi (t)|ϕ) .                  (7.14)
                                 2π               −∞

The two cases are rather similar, and can be treated on equal grounds if we set S0,∅ = 0 and ρ∅ϕ = 1.
Let us do so in the following.
   Note that
                         1
                             Z ∞                                  hZ                            i
                                   dt Vi (−t) (ϕ|Vi (t)|ϕ) = r              dE |E⟩⟨E|i pi (E) ,                        (7.15)
                        2π   −∞                                        σi

where |E⟩i are energy eigenstates for Ci , and pi (E) = (ϕ|r(|E⟩⟨E|i )|ϕ) is the probability density for
the energy of Ci in the state |ϕ). Thus, the density operator may be written
                                                      hZ                             i
                               S0,R\Ci −S0,R +βHi                                        R\Ci
                         ρR
                          ϕ ≈e                    r             dE |E⟩⟨E|i pi (E) ρϕ            ,                      (7.16)
                                                        σi

Thus, the density operator for the system relative to R can essentially be computed in terms of the
density operator for the system relative to R \ Ci , and the probability density for the energy of the
clock Ci . The clock Ci and the rest of the degrees of freedom are separable in this density operator;
indeed, all but the last factor above make up an operator acting on Ci . This means there are no
additional correlations between the system and Ci which need to be taken into account.
   This is a direct way to see that the antisemiclassical clock Ci is fairly useless for observing the
system; the state of the system relative to R is basically determined by the state of the system relative
to R \ Ci , so we do not gain any new information by using Ci (other than its own energy’s probability
density).
   The entropy of ρR
                   ϕ has a similar decomposition. Indeed the logarithm of the density operator
may be written (here we use the assumption that (7.1) holds on timescales less than β, so that eβHi
approximately commutes with the other contributions to the density operator)
                                                      hZ                                  i
                                                                                                     R\Ci
               log ρR
                    ϕ ≈ S0,R\Ci − S0,R + βHi + r                dE |E⟩⟨E|i log pi (E) + log ρϕ              ,          (7.17)
                                                           σi

and with this, we can compute the entropy as
                                                                   Z
       S R [ϕ] = − (ϕ|log ρR
                           ϕ |ϕ) ≈ S0,R − S0,R\Ci − β Ē −               dE pi (E) log pi (E) + S R\Ci [ϕ]             (7.18)
                                                                    σi

(note that S ∅ [ϕ] = 0). Thus, the entropy decomposes as the sum of −β Ē, a Shannon entropy for the
energy of the clock Ci and the entropy of the system relative to R \ Ci , plus some constants.
   In the particular case where R = {Ci } contains only one clock, the formula simplifies to
                                                        Z
                              S [ϕ] ≈ S0,R − β Ē −
                               R
                                                                dE pi (E) log pi (E).                                  (7.19)
                                                           σi

This (leading order contribution to the) entropy does not depend on the state of the fields at all. If
σi is bounded below such that the algebra of operators is Type II1 as described earlier, then it is
interesting to comment on what happens if we substitute in the canonical normalisation (4.24). One
finds                                 Z
                           S [ϕ] ≈ −
                            R
                                          dE pi (E)(log pi (E) − log si (E)),                  (7.20)
                                            σi


                                                       62
where                                                .Z                  ′
                                     si (E) = e−βE           dE ′ e−βE                             (7.21)
                                                        σi

is the Boltzmann distribution for the clock at inverse temperature β. We may recognise S R [ϕ] as
(minus) the classical relative entropy between this Boltzmann distribution and the actual probability
distribution of the clock’s energies.


8     Observer-dependence of gravitational entropy
    We have described how to use clock QRFs to define gravitational subregion algebras with well-
defined von Neumann entropies. But depending on which set of clocks R one uses, one gets different
von Neumann algebras, and therefore different entropies. Thus, entropy is observer-dependent. These
differences are ultimately manifestations of the subsystem relativity discussed on Sect. 2.7.
    Any comparison of entropies between different algebras will be sensitive to how we normalise the
traces of these algebras. For the algebras discussed in this paper, the normalisations are parametrised
by the numbers S0,R , and these contribute overall state-independent constants to the entropies, as
previously discussed. Thus, in order to technically speaking have a full comparison of the entropies for
different choices of R, one needs to have fixed these constants. In special cases there are canonical ways
to do so; for example, when R contains a single clock whose energy spectrum is bounded below, we may
pick S0,R such that the trace of the identity is 1, as discussed at (4.24). One may also in certain cases
use the partial trace to relate the trace normalisations of different algebras, as described in Sec. 4.3.
But in the general case, there does not seem to be any canonical way to pick these normalisations.
    One might therefore be concerned that the ambiguity in the constants S0,R will muddy our proposed
picture of observer-dependence in the entropy. The reason this is not the case is that these constants
are necessarily state-independent. Thus, even if one does not have a canonical way to fix these constants,
the entropy functionals one gets for different sets of clocks R will depend on the state in fundamentally
different ways, and this dependence cannot be absorbed into the constants. Thus, the state-dependence
of the entropies is unambiguous, and it is strictly speaking this state-dependence that we will now
discuss.
    In this section, we will explore several examples of this phenomenon: a physically motivated setup
involving a gravitational interferometer, a scenario involving superselection and degenerate clocks, and
a situation where only some clocks satisfy the conditions necessary for a semiclassical approximation.
We will also comment on what happens to entropies when we have periodic clocks [70], and how these
compare to the monotonic clocks we have so far discussed in this paper.

8.1     Case study: gravitational interferometer
   We first consider an example which we dub the “gravitational interferometer” for reasons explained
below, which was also discussed in section 4.2 of [1]. Technical details such as the density matrix
computations will be relegated to App. F. With this case study we want to explicitly show a feasible
setup in which we can identify a manifestation of subsystem relativity, as explained in Sect. 2.7, namely
the observer-dependence of gravitational entropy. This relativity refers to what different observers
would attribute to the QFT degrees of freedom alone. Concretely, we will work with two clocks C1 , C2
in the same subregion U and one clock C3 in the complementary region U ′ . These regions could be
complementary static patches of a de Sitter space, the left and right exteriors of a maximally extended
Schwarzschild spacetime, or possibly the more general regions as suggested by JSS [24]. With this
in mind, we will use the words “patch” and “subregion” interchangeably, while acknowledging that
the latter scenario is on less rigorous footing regarding assumptions about the constraint and QFT


                                                   63
modular flow [40]. For purposes of this discussion we take for granted that the necessary ingredients
are in place.
   We will consider the algebra of field operators in subregion U, dressed with respect to one or the
other clock. On the perspective-neutral level, these are r(AH   U C1 ) and r(AU C2 ). These algebras encode
                                                                              H

the gauge-invariant degrees of freedom that each observer ascribes to the QFT degrees of freedom
alone. The entropy associated with these will thus correspond to the entropy each observer assigns
to the QFT (including graviton) degrees of freedom within U. It may be that they each only have
access to these degrees of freedom. This is the minimum guaranteed by the timelike tube theorem
[154, 156, 157, 167]; it depends on operational assumptions whether they may also have access to other
clocks in the same patch. Even if they do, these algebras account for what they each assign to the
QFT alone. Crucially, although these pertain to the fields in the same subregion, they are inequivalent
gauge-invariant algebras
                                              U C1 ) ̸= r(AU C2 )
                                           r(AH                                                        (8.1)
                                                           H


whose overlap is described by Eq. (2.62) and may be trivial as in Eq. (2.61) when the modular
Hamiltonian HS has an ergodic action on the regional QFT algebra. Consequently, since the density
operators are defined with respect to distinct algebras, so will the entropy turn out to be unequal
under the same global state. At the reduced level, this means that operators, in particular the density
operators, cannot be transformed into each other by conjugation with a unitary QRF transformation
(2.53).
    As emphasised in the Introduction, the usual horizon entropy contribution that arises in a decom-
position of the entropy in semiclassical states is associated with the full dressed algebra of all fields and
all clocks within the same patch. In this context, this means r(AH   SC1 C2 ) rather than either of the two
subalgebras (8.1). Thus we emphasise that the relativity of gravitational entropy discussed here is not
a statement about relativity of horizon area or horizon entropy. Though the reduced density operators
associated to the full patch algebra r(AH SC1 C2 ) would take different expressions in the perspectives of
C1 and C2 , these are always unitarily related. Thus the total generalised entropy of the same patch (or
other region) is not frame-dependent. To be more explicit about the differences that do occur between
the algebras (8.1), we will design our setup to highlight two possible causes of disparity between these
dressed QFT entropies: first, when the clocks are not isomorphic, i.e. their energy spectra differ, and
second, when the entanglement structure differs.
    We now describe the setup. We take the three clocks to be non-ideal, such that individual clock
states are normalisable. We will first consider a situation where, from the perspective of clock C1 , the
state on the other factors is entirely unentangled (i.e. a product state). This will decidedly not be the
case from the perspective of clock C2 , so with this class of wavefunctions it will be easy to emphasise
the role of differing entanglement structure between the two perspectives. We will then consider a
more specific state within this class in which the second clock is in a simple superposition of clock
orientation states when seen from the perspective of the first clock. The third, complementary clock
will also be taken to be a simple clock state. Regarding the configuration of states on C1 and C2 ,
this situation can be achieved by a gravitational interferometer experiment where we have a clock
split into two branches where in one branch the clock has a flyby to a massive object. Due to the
stronger gravitational field close to the massive object, the time reading of the flyby clock will be
dilated. Bringing both branches together then results in the desired superposition (see Fig. 8.1). In
effect, this is just a quantum version of Shapiro time delay [171].
   We start with a state which from C1 -perspective is in a full product state between all components
                                         √
                                 |ϕ|1 ⟩ = N Π|1 (|ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩2 ⊗ |g⟩3 ).                         (8.2)



                                                     64
                                                                        |τ2 ⟩2 + |τ2 + ∆τ ⟩


                                   massive
                                                             τ2                τ2 + ∆τ
                                   object


                                                                        |0⟩2
                                                                       C2                     C1

                 Figure 8.1: Clock C2 starts at time reading 0 and is then split into two
                 branches where one branch makes a flyby encounter with a massive object
                 while the other is kept far away (or we accelerate them by different amounts).
                 Due to time dilation, the flyby branch will lack behind in time by an amount
                 ∆τ w.r.t. the other branch. After recombination of both branches, we thus
                 achieve a superposition of two clock states. Meanwhile, clock C1 just evolves
                 as is without splitting into multiple branches.


In this expression, |f ⟩2 ∈ H2 and |g⟩3 ∈ H3 are both normalised on their respective factors, with
overall normalisation constant N such that the perspectival state is also normalised. Furthermore,
without loss of generality we will set the gauge parameters to zero: τi = 0 = τj . Eventually we will
take |f ⟩2 to be the superposition and |g⟩3 to be a pure clock state, but we will leave it general for now.
We also let f and g represent the energy-basis wavefunctions on their respective factors. In App. F it
is shown that a frame change (2.53) to the perspective of clock C2 results in the reduced state
                                             √
               |ϕ|2 ⟩ := V1→2 (0, 0) |ϕ|1 ⟩ = 2πN f (−HS − H1 − H3 )Π|2 (|ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩1 ⊗ |g⟩3 ).        (8.3)

Using these two expressions for the same global state, the reduced density operators for the algebras
ASC1 and ASC2 are likewise computed in App. F. The results are reported together in equation (F.13),
in the perspectives of C1 and C2 , respectively. We report these here with the simplifying assumption
that ϕS lies in the canonical cone of ψS , such that consequently JϕS |ψS = JψS and we obtain the polar
                                     1/2
decomposition SϕS |ψS = JψS ∆ϕS |ψS .40 With these choices, we obtain the reduced density operators
                                                Z
              −S0,1 −β(H2 +H3 )        1/2                                                                 1/2
ρϕ|1 = 2πN e                      Π|1 ∆ϕS |ψS         dϵ2 Π(−H̄1 − ϵ2 , σ3 )|f (ϵ2 )|2 |g(−H̄1 − ϵ2 )|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|1 ,    (8.4)
                                                σ2
                                                         Z
                                                1/2                                                      1/2
ρϕ|2 = 2πN e−S0,2 −β(H1 +H3 ) f (H̄2 )Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS              dϵ1 Π(−H̄2 − ϵ1 , σ3 )|g(−H̄2 − ϵ1 )|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 f ∗ (H̄2 ).
                                                          σ1
                                                                                                                         (8.5)

In the expressions above, H̄i := Hi − H denotes the constraint-equivalent of Hi on H|i , and as usual
the non-trivial projectors Π(−H̄i − εj , σk ) restrict −H̄i − εj to eigenspaces in the spectral range σk .
    The two non-trivial projectors within the integrals will generally render entropy computations
difficult. Therefore, to have both of them act approximately trivially we take clock C3 to be effectively
ideal. There are situations in which an ideal clock in the complement does appear naturally. For
instance, when the spacetime has a boundary in the complement, then H3 could be the second-order
ADM boundary Hamiltonian which is unbounded, cf. Sec. 3.1. We also now take the wave function
of this clock to be a simple clock state |g⟩3 = 2π/∥σ3 ∥ |τ3 ⟩, with ∥σ3 ∥ := σi dεi the spectral range.
                                                p                             R



  40
     This choice turns out to be not that restricting, as one can apply a unitary from the commutant algebra to such a
state to reach any other cyclic-separating state.


                                                                  65
Then the modulus just becomes a constant: |g(E3 )| 2 = ∥σ3 ∥−1 . With these simplifications, the integral
between the relative modular operators in (8.4) gives ∥σ3 ∥−1 , while that in (8.5) gives ∥σ1 ∥∥σ3 ∥−1 .
We acquire the two density operators

                     ρϕ|1 ≈ 2πN ∥σ3 ∥−1 e−S0,1 −β(H2 +H3 ) Π|1 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|1 ,                                           (8.6)
                     ρϕ|2 ≈ 2πN ∥σ1 ∥∥σ3 ∥−1 e−S0,2 −β(H1 +H3 ) f (H̄2 )Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 f ∗ (H̄2 ).                    (8.7)

These density operators (8.6) and (8.7) are very similar, but still indicate some aspects of subsystem
relativity. The wavefunction f has disappeared from (8.6) altogether while it is still present in (8.7).
Therefore properties such as entanglement entropy of the algebra ASC2 will depend on f , while the
same is not true for ASC1 even in the same physical state. This is appropriate considering that the
former algebra contains (for example) reorientations of clock C2 while the latter excludes these. An
additional manifestation of subsystem relativity is evident in the role of the two projectors Π|1 and Π|2 .
These indicate different ‘coarse-grainings’ of the dressed QFT degrees of freedom, which are essentially
represented in the density operators through the relative modular operator ∆ϕS |ψS . Taking these
algebras to represent what can be learnt about the QFT state on the subregion ‘from the perspective’
of each clock, we see that the differences can be stark and physically significant.
   At this point, one might object that taking the limit that C3 becomes ideal leads to unreasonable
clock states as these are not normalisable. However, this limit does not cause trouble because the
reduced states |ϕ|1 ⟩ and |ϕ|2 ⟩ are normalised as states on their respective reduced Hilbert spaces (not
necessarily on each individual kinematical factor). The projectors Π|1 and Π|2 keep the unbounded σ3
integral in check and the normalisation constant N can be adapted accordingly.
   To compute the entropy beyond semiclassical order, we now consider the specific example of Shapiro
time delay under consideration. We thus let |f ⟩2 be a superposition of two clock states, i.e.
                                                                              s
                                                                                  N2 −iτ2 E
                  |f ⟩2 =       N2 |τ2 ⟩2 + |τ2 + ∆τ ⟩2 ,        f (E) =                    (1 + e−iαE/∥σ2 ∥ ),        (8.8)
                            p                             
                                                                                     e
                                                                                  2π

with the dimensionless parameter α := ∆τ ∥σ2 ∥ and the α-dependent normalisation constant
                                                                      π
                                 N2 :=                                                            ,                   (8.9)
                                                      sin(                )     sin(αϵmin
                                                                                      2 /∥σ2 ∥)
                                              
                                                             αϵmax /∥σ2 ∥
                                          ∥σ2 ∥ 1 +            2
                                                                α             −        α


which reduces to π/(2∥σ2 ∥) when α → 0. We also note down the expression for the state in the other
perspective (8.3)
                                                                                                                 
 |ϕ|2 ⟩ ∝ Π|2 eiHS τ2 |ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |−τ2 ⟩1 ⊗ |τ3 − τ2 ⟩3 + eiHS ∆τ |ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |−τ2 − ∆τ ⟩1 ⊗ |τ3 − τ2 − ∆τ ⟩3                 (8.10)

to show that superposition in one perspective (C1 ) generally leads to entanglement under a QRF
transformation (to C2 perspective) [65, 67–69, 71, 77, 81]. The density operator associated to this
state is (8.7)

           N N2 ∥σ1 ∥ −S0,2 −β(H1 +H3 ) −iτ2 H̄2
  ρϕ|2 ≈             e                 e         (1 + e−iαH̄2 /∥σ2 ∥ )Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 (1 + eiαH̄2 /∥σ2 ∥ )eiτ2 H̄2 . (8.11)
             ∥σ3 ∥

While the entropy for (8.6) can be computed straightforwardly, namely the f -independent
                                                                                                         
              S[ϕ|1 ] = S0,1 − log 2πN ∥σ3 ∥−1 + β ⟨H2 + H3 ⟩ϕ|1 − ⟨log Π|1 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|1 ⟩ϕ|1 ,                        (8.12)

this is not true for (8.11) owing to the non-commutativity between HS and ∆ϕS |ψS . Nevertheless, the
                                                         †
non-commutative part can be written in the form eY eX eY on which we need to apply the BCH-formula.

                                                                 66
In general, this leads to an infinite series of terms unless we have more specific information about the
commutator. Luckily, there is a way to expand this into a small parameter if such one appears in Y ,
which is here the case when we take α ≪ 1, representing the superimposed clock approximately be a
single clock state. The details are worked out in App. G. We thus find

         2πN ∥σ1 ∥ −S0,2 −β(H1 +H3 ) −iτ2 H̄2       α                                α
                                                                                                     
  ρϕ|2 ≈            e               e         1−i        H̄2 Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 1 + i        H̄2 eiτ2 H̄2 .
         ∥σ2 ∥∥σ3 ∥                               2∥σ2 ∥                           2∥σ2 ∥
                                                                                                    (8.13)
We can now make use of formula (G.6) by making the identification

                                                                   α               α
                                                                         
            X ≡ log Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 ,              Y ≡ log 1 − i        H̄2 = −i        H̄2 + O(α2 ).       (8.14)
                                                                 2∥σ2 ∥          2∥σ2 ∥

This specific piece up to first order in α is hence determined by
                            †
                                                              α h                          i
           log eY eX eY              = log Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 + i         HS , log Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 + O(α2 )
                                                               2∥σ2 ∥
                                                          1      d                       
                                     = log Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 − ∆τ log Π|2 ∆ϕS (t)|ψS Π|2
                                                              2   dt                           t=0
                                       1                                               
                                     =    log Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 + log Π|2 ∆ϕS (−∆τ )|ψS Π|2 + O(α2 ).         (8.15)
                                       2
Technically, this does not capture all the non-commutativity since there
                                                                            is also
                                                                                  the conjugation by the
unitary eiτ 2 H̄2 , but this can simply be taken outside the log as log U (·)U = U log(·)U † . This leads
                                                                               †

to the entropy
                                                          
 S[ϕ|2 ] = S0,2 − log 2πN ∥σ1 ∥∥σ2 ∥−1 ∥σ3 ∥−1 + β ⟨H1 + H3 ⟩ϕ|2
                      1                                                                  
                  −      ⟨log Π|2 ∆ϕS (−τ2 )|ψS Π|2 ⟩ϕ|2 + ⟨log Π|2 ∆ϕS (−τ2 −∆τ )|ψS Π|2 ⟩ϕ|2 + O(α2 ). (8.16)
                      2
The f -dependence in this expression creeps in through the dependence on ∆τ . Also note that by
taking the expectation value in the state (8.10), the result is in fact not dependent on τ2 .
   Given expressions (8.12) and (8.16) we can discuss the two sources of entropy relativity in more
detail:
   1. α → 0 : in the limit that α → 0, with ∆τ → 0 and ∥σ2 ∥ fixed, we have that |f ⟩2 (8.8) becomes
      a pure clock state with constant modulus. The density operator ρϕ|2 (8.7) then becomes of
      the same form as ρϕ|1 (8.6), and the same holds for their respective entropies (8.16) and (8.12).
      The only difference in entropy in this case then stems from the different fuzzinesses
                                                                                                of the
      clocks. In the case the clocks are non-isomorphic, i.e. σ1 ̸= σ2 , the terms log Π|1 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|1
                                      
      and log Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 functionally differ in the sense that the QFT degrees of freedom are
      coarse-grained in different ways;
   2. σ1 = σ2 : when the clocks are isomorphic, then the projected modular operators will be func-
      tionally the same. When we let |f ⟩2 be a superposition α ̸= 0, the entropy associated to |ϕ|2 ⟩
                                                                                                 
     (8.10) has an extra term proportional to a commutator iα ⟨[log Π|2 ∆ϕS |ψS Π|2 , HS ] ⟩ϕ|2 (8.15)
     as a consequence of the different entanglement structure from the product state |ϕ|1 ⟩ (8.2).
   In conclusion, by studying the quantum version of Shapiro time delay we exemplified two possible
sources for entropy relativity. The first one is the case when the clocks are non-isomorphic, which also
shows up at the semiclassical level. For the second one with different entanglement structures in the
reduced states, we had to go beyond the semiclassical level and looked at an expansion to first order
in a small parameter to see the different entropy contributions.


                                                                   67
8.2   Degenerate clocks
   Let us now discuss the case in which the two observers, Alice and Bob, occupy the same spacetime
region and carry each a degenerate clock described by a Hamiltonian HC ∝ p2 , as also considered in
[69]. We will illustrate that in this case subsystem relativity also applies across degeneracy sectors
when we consider the full patch algebra, i.e. including all clocks in their subregion – provided we make
an operational restriction as described in Sec. 5.1.3. We thus have a constraint of the form

                                                 p2A   p2
                                    H = HS +         + B − H3 ,                                    (8.17)
                                                2mA 2mB
where H3 is a non-degenerate, non-ideal clock and the minus sign reflects the opposite time direction
in the complementary region, in which we assume clock C3 to be located.
   As explained in Secs. 5.1.2 and 5.1.5, the physical Hilbert space decomposes into a direct sum of
degeneracy sectors. Since Alice’s clock CA and Bob’s clock CB are both doubly degenerate, having
each a positive and negative frequency sector, the physical Hilbert space consists of four sectors

                                 Hphys = H++ ⊕ H+− ⊕ H−+ ⊕ H−− ,                                   (8.18)

where the first label refers to the sector of CA and the second one to that of CB . Starting with a
physical state |Φ), this can be reduced to either observer’s perspective in one of the four sectors
                                      ′                                λλ′
through the PW reduction maps Rλλ   i (τ ) leading to four states |ϕ|i ⟩. QRF transformations are then
performed within one sector overlap, i.e. Vi,λ→j,λ′ (τi , τj ) within ΛR = λλ′ (cf. Sec. 5.1.5).
   For the algebras, we will consider the case where R = {CA , CB } and Rc = {C3 } where each observer
only has access to the full +-sector of their own clock Ri , i = A, B, which means they have access to
the parts of both sectors of the other clock Rī that overlap with their own +-sector. Thus, we will
operationally restrict the gauge-invariant algebras associated to each observer and it is quite common
to only permit one frequency sector each. Namely, we impose that each observer only has access to
their clock’s positive frequency/right moving modes and does not have access to the degeneracy sector
swap operators in Cj ∈R B(Cmj ) for neither of the clocks; this restriction thus entails an operational
                    N

superselection that may be justified in different ways, as we described in Sec. 5.1.3. We emphasise that
this is not a necessary restriction, but we want to see what the repercussions for entropy relativity are.
   In this case, the operationally restricted gauge-invariant algebras can be written as a direct sum
over the superselection sectors, as in Eq. (5.40). They are of the form

                        AA = AH        H
                              SR,++ ⊕ ASR,+− ,       AB = AH        H
                                                           SR,++ ⊕ ASR,−+ .                        (8.19)

With this decomposition of the algebra, the entropy can then be calculated according to (5.48) by
looking at the contributions per sector S ΛR [ϕ]. Notice that we are dealing with an algebra of type
II∞ because we have more than one clock in R (4.22) despite the clock spectra being bounded from
below σA = σB = R+ . Our above assumption also means that Alice and Bob do not have access to
the identity component C1λλ′ on the remaining sectors, as otherwise they could rescale states and
observables there. This has important consequences for the probabilities pΛR in (5.48) which will have
to be reinterpreted as conditional probabilities, as we explain below.
    The algebras on the physical level are then obtained by acting with r(.) which is ensured to be
faithful since Rc is non-empty, containing clock C3 , cf. Sec. 2.8. Density matrices and entropies are to
be computed per sector, as explained in Sec. 5.2.2, in the same way as the nondegenerate case. Note
that the nontrivial overlap between both only consists of one overlap sector

                                     r(AA ) ∩ r(AB ) = r(AH
                                                          SR,++ ).                                 (8.20)

                                                   68
This situation thus differs from the gravitational interferometer example in Sec. 8.1, where R contained
only one clock for each observer’s perspective and the overlap between the two happened to be trivial
(when HS has an ergodic action, see Eq. (2.61)), unlike here.
   As a consequence, Alice and Bob can only meaningfully compare states/observables on this overlap.
The density matrix ρϕ will have a part ρ++    ϕ  that lies in this algebra and can be probed by both
Alice and Bob. While the two will use distinct observables from r(AH    SR,++ ) to probe this state, their
description of it will be related by a unitary QRF transformation VA,+→B,+ (τA , τB ), and so the entropy
contribution of the ++-sector will be the same for both observers
                                             ++
                                            SA  [ϕ] = SB
                                                       ++
                                                          [ϕ].                                       (8.21)

   The situation changes on the other halves of their respective algebras. Alice will be able to access
the ρ+−
     ϕ   part of the full density matrix whilst Bob will have access to ρ−+
                                                                         ϕ . There is no a priori reason
for these density matrices to be the same or even lead to the same entropies. It is easy to engineer
setups in which this is indeed true, such that
                                                        −+
                                             +−
                                            SA  [ϕ] ̸= SB  [ϕ].                                      (8.22)

Thence, this case of observer-dependence is sourced by what we may call subsystem relativity across
the degeneracy sectors, cf. Sec. 5.1.6. The easiest example of such an engineered setup is if one chooses
C3 to be nearly ideal, just as we did for the interferometer Eqs. (8.6, 8.7), and picks reduced states of
the form
                         |ϕΛ R            ΛR
                           |i ⟩ ∝ Π|i ( |ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |τī ⟩ ⊗ |τ3 ⟩), ΛR ∈ {+−, −+}.                     (8.23)
Recall that an ideal clock C3 is not necessarily an entirely unreasonable assumption, as the ADM
boundary Hamiltonian (for second-order metric perturbations) is the Hamiltonian of an ideal clock
as mentioned in Sec. 3.1. As C3 is, by assumption, in the causal complement of the current region
of interest, we may thus simply assume that the complementary region is one with an asymptotic
boundary such that C3 is an ADM boundary clock.
    The states (8.23) can be mapped back to the gauge-invariant level through the inverse PW-reduction
maps (5.46). For this simple state it can be shown that S ΛR [ϕ] only depends on the chosen QFT-state
|ϕΛS ⟩. To have a different entropy one just chooses a QFT-state with differing properties in the
    R


distinct sector overlaps, |ϕ+−
                            S ⟩≠ |ϕ−+
                                     S ⟩.

   Finally, let us consider the coefficients pΛR in (5.48). Since Alice and Bob both only have access to
two out of four sectors, they can only access two out four coefficients through (5.43). These probabilities
can only be probed ‘relative to their existence’, so they will rather be conditional probabilities pΛ   i
                                                                                                          R


instead. By this we mean that, for example, Alice needs to renormalise as

                                          pΛR
                               pΛ
                                A =
                                 R
                                                 ,        ΛR ∈ {++, +−},                             (8.24)
                                       p++ + p+−

with the pΛR from (5.43). These are the conditional probabilities relative to Alice and Bob and should
be thought of as what they would measure, given what they have access to by assumption. They will
                                                             ++ −+
generally differ per observer: {p++
                                  A , pA } for Alice and {pB , pB } for Bob. Even though they both
                                       +−

have full access to the ++-sector, their conditional probabilities need not be equal p++
                                                                                      A ̸= pB since the
                                                                                            ++
                                                                −+
weights given by the other sector need not be equal pA ̸= pB either, and for most global states will
                                                        +−

not be. This leads to additional operational differences in the entropy (5.48): the conditional Shannon
entropy, the first contribution, will be different because their conditional probability distributions
will generally differ. There will also be a difference in the second piece of (5.48), where the entropy
contributions per sector are multiplied by these conditional probabilities. Hence, the last piece can

                                                     69
be reinterpreted as a conditional expectation value of the overall von Neumann entropy of the state
accessible to either observer.
   This examples serves to illustrate that there can be several sources of entropy relativity, depending
on the exact operational assumptions to which we subject the different observers with clocks.

8.3   Semiclassical vs. non-semiclassical clocks
   It is entirely possible in a given state for a semiclassical regime to apply to one clock but not to
another; indeed it could be that an antisemiclassical regime applies to the other clock. One would have
to apply two different entropy formulas for the two clocks (one would be the generalised entropy (6.40),
and the other would be (7.18)), and the two formulas would not agree with each other. Indeed, the
generalised entropy clearly depends on the state of the fields, whereas (7.19) does not.
   Let us now give a slightly more explicit demonstration of this phenomenon. Consider a system
with three ideal clocks C1 , C2 , C3 , and suppose the state |ϕ) in the perspective of clock C3 is a product
state of a QFT state |ϕS ⟩ ∈ HS , and clock states |ϕ1 ⟩ ∈ H1 and |ϕ2 ⟩ ∈ H2 :

                                      |ϕ|3 (0)⟩ = |ϕS ⟩ ⊗ |ϕ1 ⟩ ⊗ |ϕ2 ⟩ .                            (8.25)

The variances of the Hamiltonians HS , H1 , H2 may be computed in this state as the variances in the
respective factors |ϕS ⟩ , |ϕ1 ⟩ , |ϕ2 ⟩:
                                                D                    E
                                    (∆HS )2 = (HS − ⟨HS ⟩ϕS )2                  ,                    (8.26)
                                                                         ϕS
                                                D                   E
                                    (∆H1 )2 = (H1 − ⟨H1 ⟩ϕ1 )2              ,                        (8.27)
                                                                      ϕ
                                                D                   E 1
                                    (∆H2 )2 = (H2 − ⟨H2 ⟩ϕ2 )2              .                        (8.28)
                                                                      ϕ2

Now, let us choose these states such that

                                (∆H2 )2 ≪ β −2 ,       (∆HS )2 ≪ (∆H1 )2 .                           (8.29)

This is of course possible, because the spectra of each of HS , H1 , H2 are unbounded above and below.
Moreover, these imply that a semiclassical regime applies to clock C1 , but an antisemiclassical regime
applies to clock C2 , as required.

8.4   Periodic vs. monotonic clocks
    In this paper we have so far considered only monotonic clocks, i.e. those which record distinct
times for any value of R. We shall now briefly consider instead periodic clocks, i.e. those with times
cyclically evolving through some finite interval [0, tmax ). Such clocks were thoroughly investigated
in [70], and below we shall quickly review some of the relevant details.
    A periodic clock Cper is not a complete reference frame for a full group R of time evolutions. Rather,
it can only be used to fix the gauge up to some discrete subgroup Z generated by evolution in time
by the amount tmax . As such, the periodic clock is a QRF for the quotient group U(1) = R/Z. Its
Hamiltonian HCper is the quantisation of the generator of a representation of U(1), and so must have a
discrete spectrum of eigenvalues, which may be written in the form
                                                   φ
                                                                        
                                    σCper = ω nµ +              nµ ∈ Z ,                             (8.30)
                                                   2π

where φ ∈ R, ω = tmax
                   2π
                      , and µ ranges over some finite or infinite set of labels. A non-trivial phase
φ means that the clock transforms under a projective unitary representation of U(1), since we have

                                                     70
e−iHCper tmax = e−iφ . For simplicity, let us restrict to the case where φ = 0, so that the representation is
genuinely unitary (this restriction may be relaxed as described in [70]). We shall also assume without
loss of generality that t = tmax is the smallest non-zero value for which e−iHCper t = 1, which in terms
of the spectrum means that the {nµ } are coprime. As a further simplifying assumption, we take the
spectrum to be non-degenerate, so that the Hilbert space of Cper is HCper = L2 (σCper ).
    As in the monotonic case, one may then define clock states as follows (setting the arbitrary phase,
as in Eq. (2.1), to g(ϵµ ) = 0):
                                    |t⟩per =         e−iεµ t |εµ ⟩ ,                             (8.31)
                                               X

                                                       εµ ∈σCper
                                                                        ′
where |εµ ⟩ is the HCper = εµ eigenstate. We have e−iHCper t |t⟩per = |t + t′ ⟩per and |t⟩per = |t + tmax ⟩per .
These states form a resolution of the identity
                                                   1
                                                         Z tmax
                                           1=                      dt |t⟩⟨t|per ,                        (8.32)
                                                 tmax     0

thus furnishing a U(1)-covariant clock POVM. A general operator acting on the fields and the periodic
clock, i.e. an a ∈ AS ⊗ B(HCper ), may be written in the form

                                1
                                     Z tmax
                         a=                   dt a(t, t′ ) ⊗ t′ t′ per ,            a(t, t′ ) ∈ AS .     (8.33)
                              tmax    0

Much of the discussion then proceeds similarly to the case of the monotonic clock; we refer the reader
to [70] for more details.
   Let us in particular give an outline of some relevant properties of the invariant subalgebra (AS ⊗
B(HCper ))HS +HCper . For now AS will refer abstractly to the algebra of ‘system’ operators; we will
shortly specialise to the case where the system includes the quantum fields in a subregion.
   It is instructive to note that we can construct this subalgebra in three steps. First, we can impose
invariance under the group Z of evolutions by integer multiples of tmax . Since the clock is invariant
under this group, we can restrict our attention to the system, for which we go to the subalgebra
                                                               −iHS tmax
                                          AtSmax := (AS )e                  ⊂ AS ,                       (8.34)

As a second step, we can take the crossed product of AtSmax with its modular flow. To this end, let us
for the moment assume that Cper is an ideal periodic clock, which means that we allow all nµ ∈ Z
in Eq. (8.30) with the consequence that ⟨t|t′ ⟩per ∝ δ(t − t′ ) and HCper ≃ L2 (U(1)), as appropriate
for a U(1)-crossed product. Indeed, note that now modular flow is a representation of the leftover
U(1) = R/Z of period tmax , so this crossed product may be written AtSmax ⋊ U(1). This algebra is
guaranteed to have a trace, because the crossed product makes modular flow inner.
   This crossed product would thus correspond to employing a periodic clock whose spectrum is given
by ωZ. The third step in the construction of (AS ⊗ B(HCper ))HS +HCper is therefore to project the
spectrum of the clock down to σCper ⊆ ωZ (analogous to the projection onto the spectrum employed
when considering non-ideal monotonic clocks).
   One should then also represent this on a physical Hilbert space (which may be constructed as
demonstrated in [70]). For reasons that are essentially analogous to the case of a monotonic clock
explained earlier (and so whose details we skip), one would end up with a normal and faithful (so long
as there is at least one other clock in the full system) representation of a Type II1 (if σCper is bounded
below) or Type II∞ (if not) von Neumann algebra AH      SCper (assuming the invariant subalgebra is itself
Type II). As such, one can construct density operators and traces by similar formulae to those we
have given in this paper for the monotonic case.

                                                              71
   Having explained how to generalise the results of the paper to periodic clocks, let us now qualitatively
and briefly explain how the entropies will differ when using a periodic clock vs a monotonic clock. The
essential point is that in the intermediate algebra AtSmax ⋊ U(1) used in the construction of AH SCper , we
must restrict to periodic system observables before ever involving the clock. This will clearly change
the way in which the entropy functional for a periodic clock depends on the state, relative to that of a
monotonic clock. This is a clear source of entropy relativity (see further discussion in [172]).
   Let us now consider what happens when AS is the algebra of QFT operators in a subregion. In
this case, the above construction typically simplifies significantly, because the spectrum of the vacuum
modular flow is purely continuous, and hence AtSmax = C1 is trivial. Consider, for example, the vacuum
modular Hamiltonian of a Rindler wedge, i.e. the boost generator. In any QFT there are no bounded
operators that evolve periodically under a boost (of course there are operators which create particles
of a certain fixed boost charge – but such operators are unbounded and thus not elements of AS ). In
this case, the invariant subalgebra simplifies to B(HCper )Hper . Therefore, the periodic clock cannot be
used by itself to measure anything in the QFT. In this sense, a periodic clock is even worse than an
antisemiclassical monotonic one for observing the QFT, and in this case the only contributions to the
entropy associated with the periodic clock arise from its own internal degrees of freedom.
   The situation changes when we allow the system algebra AS to contain more than just operators
acting on the QFT. For example, it could be AS = AU ⊗ B(HC ), where AU is the algebra of the
QFT in a subregion U, while HC is the Hilbert space of another clock, which we take to be ideal and
monotonic. Note that now HS is the modular Hamiltonian of the QFT plus the energy of clock C.
Then clearly AtSmax is non-trivial: it contains as a subalgebra the crossed product of AU with the clock
C.41 Then the invariant algebra (AS ⊗ HCper )HS +HCper contains more than just clock observables, and
so the corresponding entropy has contributions from the QFT. On the other hand, this algebra is
equivalent to the crossed product of AU ⊗ B(HCper ) with the monotonic clock C, which we already
know is Type II∞ . The entropy would be equivalent to the one seen by the monotonic clock C, so
there would be no meaningful consequences of the periodicity of C.


9        Conclusion
   The basic idea underlying this paper has been that the apparent importance of QRFs in a
rigorous definition of entropy in quantum gravity [17–19, 21–39] leads one to an inevitable conclusion:
gravitational entropy is observer-dependent. Our goal has been to explore this phenomenon. We have
built upon and given a much more detailed and technical exposition of the methods used in our shorter
companion paper [1]. We argued that many parts of the framework [21] introduced coincide with the
perspective-neutral framework for QRFs [1, 66–79], which generalises the Page-Wootters formalism [87,
88], and we summarised this coincidence with the informal equation “PW = CLPW”. We considered
observers carrying clocks of a more general nature than previously considered, in the sense that they
can have degenerate energies, they can be periodic or monotonic, and they can be arbitrarily entangled
with other degrees of freedom. Furthermore, we showed how the entropies of a subregion relative to
arbitrarily many clocks reproduces the generalised entropy formula in a semiclassical regime, and we
also considered corrections to this regime. We also explored its opposite, the antisemiclassical regime.
Finally, we investigated several explicit examples of the phenomenon of observer-dependent entropies,
explaining how it can manifest from using different kinds of clocks, but also from using clocks whose


     In fact, AtSmax is in this case Type IIIλ , where λ = e−2π/T . This is because the modular flow of this algebra is outer,
    41

but it acts periodically with period T , which is exactly the definition of Type IIIλ . This is consistent with the following:
it may be confirmed that AtSmax contains as a subalgebra the crossed product of AU with periodic modular flow, which is
Type IIIλ [173, Lemma XVIII.4.17].


                                                             72
states have different properties (such as the degree of their entanglement with other degrees of freedom,
or the magnitude of their energy fluctuations).
   Our main tools were the perspective-neutral QRF formalism and the mathematical theory of von
Neumann algebras. To that end, we have explained how these two frameworks fit together. We have
given full, detailed derivations of algebras, traces, density operators, and entropies for the gravitational
subsystems defined using quantum clocks.
   Before ending, let us speculate on three other possible sources of observer-dependence in the entropy.
    First, in this paper we have made the simplifying assumption that the clocks and fields are non-
interacting (since we are taking the total Hamiltonian to decompose as a sum of QFT Hamiltonian
and clock Hamiltonians). More realistic clocks would have to backreact non-negligibly on the fields;
depending on the kinds of interactions, one would thus have modified notions of physical subsystems
and thus different entropies. Interacting QRFs have not been studied in much detail in the literature
(see [77, 112, 114, 115, 134, 174] for some exceptions). It would be interesting to see whether much
headway can be made in the gravitational setting, though there are challenges [114, 115, 174, 175].
    Next, when considering degenerate clocks, we have for simplicity restricted to the case where the
multiplicity of each energy level is independent of the energy. This again will not be the case for more
realistic clocks. The first law of thermodynamics relates the energy-dependence of this multiplicity
(via the canonical ensemble entropy of the clock) to its temperature. Thus, allowing for a non-trivial
dependence of this kind could allow one to derive an observer-dependence of the entropy arising from
the temperature of the clocks. Again, this would be interesting to investigate.
    Finally, in this paper we considered QRFs transforming only under a single gauge transformation –
the modular boost of the subregion. We moreover only implemented the single constraint corresponding
to this particular gauge symmetry. We emphasise that we did not give a concrete justification for why
this makes sense, although we did discuss it briefly in Sec. 3.1. Of course, the gravitational gauge group
is much larger than one-dimensional; it is the full spacetime diffeomorphism group. Moreover, observers
will typically not just carry clocks – they will also carry other objects such as (for example) rods and
Lorentz frames. These will transform non-trivially under other diffeomorphisms, and are required for
dressing more complicated field observables. Thus, at some point one will need to address these other
gauge symmetries and their corresponding constraints. An intermediate step to the full diffeomorphism
group would be to impose constraints generating a larger subgroup than the boost R considered in this
paper. An obvious question is how the setup we have explored can be generalised to crossed products
and QRFs for more general locally compact groups, and for more general higher-dimensional symmetry
groups as investigated in [54, 66, 163]. See [29] for an application of the perspective-neutral formalism
to perturbative quantum gravity with a two-dimensional group of diffeomorphisms, which allowed for
an extension of the generalised second law beyond the semiclassical regime.
   If one is able to carry out this generalisation, then a natural expectation would be that the entropy
of a subsystem relative to different observers would now continue to be sensitive to the nature of the
QRFs carried by those observers. In general, such QRFs transform in a representation of a subgroup
of diffeomorphisms. A basic example would be a QRF transforming under SO(3) or its double cover
SU(2) (which is natural for example in the case of the de Sitter static patch, whose symmetry group is
R × SO(3), with R being the boost). Representations of SU(2) are labeled by their spin j, and it is
natural to expect that the entropy depends on the value of the observer spin.
   Somewhat related to this, the trajectory of the observer carrying the quantum clock is usually taken
as classical in most works on gravitational crossed product algebras. There is an interesting recent
development [106], where this setting was generalised to also describing the location of the observers


                                                    73
in a quantum manner in two-dimensional de Sitter space. This allows their associated subregions to
overlap. Such an expanded description of a quantum observer also constitutes a QRF (with additional
degrees of freedom than just the clock) and it would be interesting to extend our observations to that
case. We leave investigation of this and related questions to future work.


Acknowledgments
   We thank Gonçalo Araújo Regado, Wissam Chemissany, Åsmund Folkestad, Laurent Freidel, Elliot
Gesteau, Ted Jacobson, Fabio Mele, Federico Piazza, Gautam Satishchandran and Antony Speranza
for helpful discussions. This work was supported in part by funding from the Okinawa Institute of
Science and Technology Graduate University. It was also made possible through the support of the
ID# 62312 grant from the John Templeton Foundation, as part of the ‘The Quantum Information
Structure of Spacetime’ Project (QISS) from the John Templeton Foundation. The opinions expressed
in this project/publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
John Templeton Foundation. Research at Perimeter Institute is supported in part by the Government
of Canada through the Department of Innovation, Science and Economic Development and by the
Province of Ontario through the Ministry of Colleges and Universities.


A     Additional derivations concerning non-ideal clocks
A.1    Fourier transform for non-ideal clocks
   While the clock states in Eq. (2.1) need not be orthogonal and the clock energy may not range
over the full reals, a Fourier transform still exists [68]. Indeed,
                                           1
                                                        Z
                                    |ϵ⟩ = √                 dt e−ig(ϵ) eitϵ |t⟩                       (A.1)
                                            2π          R

with overlap
                                                 1
                                        ⟨ϵ|t⟩ = √ eig(ϵ) e−itϵ .                                      (A.2)
                                                 2π
Hence, for a state |ψ⟩ with wave function ψ(t)
                                                        Z
                                             |ψ⟩ =          dt ψ(t) |t⟩                               (A.3)

by making use of (2.6) we get that
                                               1
                                                             Z
                             ψ̃(ϵ) := ⟨ϵ|ψ⟩ = √                    dt eig(ϵ) e−itϵ ψ(t).              (A.4)
                                                2π             R

Conversely, the inverse Fourier transformation returns a “filtered version” of the function ψ(t), with
energy support only on the spectrum, which describes an equivalent state on the clock Hilbert space.
                                  1
                                        Z                                    Z
                        ψ̄(t) := √               dϵ e−ig(ϵ) itϵ
                                                              e ψ̃(ϵ) =           dt′ ψ(t′ ) t t′ ,
                                   2π    σC
                                                                                                      (A.5)
                        Z                    Z
                            dt ψ̄(t) |t⟩ =        dt ψ(t) |t⟩ .


A.2    Algebra of gauge-invariant clock-system observables and type conversion
   Here, we prove Eq. (2.11) from Sec. 2.2, i.e. that the algebra of gauge-invariant clock-system
observables is comprised of relational observables, describing S relative to C, and reorientations of C:
                                             D                                                 E
                    (AS ⊗ B(HC ))H = OC
                                      τ
                                        (a), 1S ⊗ UC (t) | a ∈ AS , t ∈ R .                           (A.6)

                                                              74
   To this end, consider any O ∈ (AS ⊗ B(HC ))H and consider its ‘partial matrix elements’ in the
clock states Eq. (2.1)
                                       O(t, t′ ) := ⟨t|O|t′ ⟩.                              (A.7)
Gauge invariance, i.e. [USC (t), O] = 0 for all t, implies

                                               O(t, t′ ) = US (t)O(0, t′ − t)US† (t).                                                             (A.8)

Since any such O(0, t′ − t) can be written as a linear combination (or integral) of objects of the form
f (t′ − t)a, where f (t) is some function and a ∈ AS , we have that a basis for such partial matrix
elements is given by

                               {Ot̃,a (t, t′ ) = χ(t + t̃ − t′ )US (t) a US† (t) | t̃ ∈ R, a ∈ AS },                                              (A.9)

where χ(t) is the clock state overlap distribution in Eq. (2.7). To see this, consider an arbitrary
function f (t) and recall the Fourier transforms in appendix A.1, setting g(ϵ) = 0 for simplicity,
                                                1                                      1
                                                      Z                                    Z         Z
                         ′                                           i(t′ −t)ϵ ˜                                  ′
                    f (t − t)       =          √                dϵ e          f (ϵ) =           dϵ       dt̃ ei(t −t−t̃)ϵ f (t̃)
                                                 2π      σC                           2π   σC        R
                                           Z
                                                            ′
                                    =              dt̃ χ(t − t − t̃)f (t̃).                                                                      (A.10)
                                   (2.6)       R

   Now integrating the basis elements and recalling Eq. (2.6),
           Z                                                    Z
                dt dt′ Ot̃,a (t, t′ ) |t⟩ t′         =               dt dt′ t + t̃ t′ |t⟩ t′ ⊗ US (t) a US† (t)
            R
                                                                ZR                                        Z                                 
                                                     =               dt |t⟩ t + t̃ ⊗ US (t) a US† (t)             dt′ t′ t′ ⊗ 1S
                                                                 R                                            R
                                                                                       
                                                     =          OCτ =0
                                                                       (a) UC† (t̃) ⊗ 1S ,                                                       (A.11)
                                                   (2.12)

where we made use of the clock state covariance (2.2) in the last line. This suffices for the claim since
                                                                                                         
                                       τ
                                      OC (a) = (1S ⊗ UC (τ )) OC
                                                               0
                                                                 (a) UC† (τ ) ⊗ 1S ,                                                             (A.12)

i.e. clock reorientations change the τ label at which the relational observable is evaluated.
   Next, we prove the statement in Sec. 2.2 that if AS is a von Neumann algebra, then so is the
gauge-invariant clock-system algebra (AS ⊗ B(HC ))H . We begin with the case that HC features a
non-degenerate spectrum. We can then extend the clock to an auxiliary ideal clock if it is not already
ideal. We extend the Hilbert space HC to a new Hilbert space H̃C = HC ⊕ Hadd by adding all the
missing energy eigenstates to extend σC over the full real line. In particular, by spectral decomposition,
we extend the clock Hamiltonian to a new operator H̃C on H̃C which has a nondegenerate spectrum
covering all of R. At this stage the clock is ideal and we have H̃C ≃ L2 (R).
   Extending the constraint to the extended kinematical Hilbert space H̃kin := H̃C ⊗HS , H → H̃C +HS ,
the gauge-invariant algebra becomes a crossed product of AS by the translation group generated by
the system Hamiltonian HS :
                               H̃C +HS                                  D                                                        E′′
         AS ⊗ B(L2 (R)C )                      = AS ⋊US R = e−iT̃ HS a eiT̃ HS , e−itH̃C a ∈ AS , t ∈ R                                  ,       (A.13)

where T̃ is the self-adjoint operator conjugate to H̃C on H̃C . This is a von Neumann algebra when AS
is one (e.g., see the appendices of [21, 24] for a summary of crossed products). The crossed product is
not necessarily a factor, even if AS is. However, it is one when AS is a type III1 factor and HS is the


                                                                              75
modular Hamiltonian associated with a cyclic and separating vector |ψS ⟩ in HS for AS . In this case,
the crossed product is a von Neumann factor of type II∞ .
   Some intuition regarding why such a type transition must occur can be garnered by first noting
that type III1 algebras have only outer modular flows, meaning that HS itself cannot be an element
of AS . However, a related state can easily be identified on H̃C ⊗ HS for which HS continues to
act as the modular Hamiltonian, now for the full crossed product algebra. In particular, the (non-
normalizable) state t̃C = 0 ⊗ |ψS ⟩ has this property, as can be easily checked. A modular flow on
elements â ∈ AS ⋊US R of the crossed product algebra is thus given by

       e−iuHS âeiuHS = eiuH̃C e−iu(HS +H̃C ) âeiu(HS +H̃C ) e−iuH̃C = eiuH̃C âe−iuH̃C ,   u ∈ R,   (A.14)

where we have used the fact that the crossed product algebra commutes with HS + H̃C . We see that
H̃C itself generates a modular flow for the crossed product algebra, and since bounded functions of
H̃C are part of the algebra, this is now an inner modular flow. The crossed product algebra therefore
cannot be of type III. In fact, Takesaki [12] further showed how to leverage this inner modular flow to
identify a trace on the crossed product algebra, demonstrating that it is of type II∞ (see [11] for an
accessible review of von Neumann type classifications, and appendix B of [24] for a related summary
in this context). Thus, it is the addition of the clock reorientations, given by H̃C , to the algebra that
is responsible for turning the modular flow inner and thereby for the type conversion.
    To show that the gauge-invariant clock-system algebra for the original (i.e. non-extended) clock
Hamiltonian is also a von Neumann algebra, we first note that HC = Π̃|C H̃C , where Π̃|C is the
orthogonal projector on H̃C onto its subspace HC . When σC is just an interval, it is given by
Π̃|C := Θ(ϵmax − H̃C )Θ(H̃C − ϵmin ), where ϵmax/min are the spectral limits of the original HC ; otherwise,
it is given by a sum over such products of theta functions over the respective intervals. Since the
extended clock reorientations e−itH̃C constitute a basis of bounded functions of H̃C , we have that Π̃|C
is contained in the crossed product algebra in Eq. (A.13).
     Next, we note that the clock states of the two Hamiltonians according to Eq. (2.1) are related by
|τ ⟩ = Π̃|C |τ̃ ⟩. Hence,
                                                                      
                                     0
                                    OC (a) = Π̃|C e−iT̃ HS a eiT̃ HS Π̃|C .                           (A.15)
For the original gauge-invariant clock-system algebra, we thus have that it is a subalgebra of the
crossed product
                              (AS ⊗ B(HC ))H = Π̃|C (AS ⋊US R) Π̃|C .                       (A.16)
In general, ΠAΠ is a von Neumann algebra if A is a von Neumann algebra containing the projection
Π [166, statement EP7, p. 21]; ΠAΠ is further a factor, if A is [21, footnote 7]. This proves the
claim. In particular, if AS is a type III1 factor and HS an associated modular Hamiltonian, then
(AS ⊗ B(HC ))H is a type II factor. We emphasise that the von Neumann structure is at this stage
defined in terms of the kinematical Hilbert space. In Sec. 2.8, we explore the von Neumann nature of
the action of these algebras on the physical Hilbert space.
   The case when HC has a degenerate spectrum, but the degeneracy is energy-independent (except
possibly in a set of measure zero) follows from this and is discussed in Sec. 5.1.3; when there is also
an operational superselection, (AS ⊗ B(HC ))H is then still a von Neumann algebra when AS is, but
decomposes across degeneracy sectors and can thus not be a factor.

A.3    Bounded physical operators from bounded kinematical ones
   In this appendix, we use the reduction theorem

                           RC (τ )OC
                                   τ
                                     (a)R−1
                                         C (τ ) = Π|C a Π|C ,              a ∈ L(HS )                 (A.17)

                                                        76
from [68] in Eqs. (2.43) and (2.44) to briefly prove the statement in Sec. 2.5.2 that every element
in B(Hphys ) can be obtained from an element in B(Hkin ) via the relational observable construction
in Eq. (2.12) and that this relational observable is also bounded, hence an element of (B(Hkin ))H .
Relational observables are thus complete on the physical Hilbert space.
    We begin with the case that HC is non-degenerate. Since RC (τ ) is unitary and Π|C is bounded, we
have that r(OC  τ (a)) ∈ B(H
                              phys ) if and only if a ∈ B(HS ), where we recall that r is the representation
of Ainv on Hphys . Similarly, 1C ⊗ a ∈ B(Hkin ) if and only if a ∈ B(HS ). We will now also demonstrate
                            H
that OC τ (a) ∈ (B(H
                      kin ))  if and only if a ∈ B(HS ). To see this, we again extend C to an auxiliary
ideal clock if it is not already ideal, as in appendix A.2. On the extended kinematical Hilbert space
H̃kin we can then write, as in Eq. (A.15),
                                                                         
                                 τ
                                OC (a) = Π̃|C e−i(T̃ −τ )HS a ei(T̃ −τ )HS Π̃|C .                       (A.18)

Since e−i(T̃ −τ )HS is unitary on H̃kin and Π̃|C is bounded, we see that OC
                                                                          τ (a) ∈ B(H̃
                                                                                       kin ) if and only if a is
bounded. But if OC (a) is bounded on H̃kin , it clearly is also bounded in the subspace Hkin = Π̃|C (H̃kin )
                     τ

on which it has support. Since the argument holds for any a ∈ B(HS ) and since the unitarity of RC
entails B(Hphys ) ≃ Π|C B(HS )Π|C , this proves the claim.
   In the case of a clock with energy-independent HC -degeneracy (except possibly in a set of measure
zero), this argument holds per λ-superselection sector, cf. Sec. 5.1.2.

A.4    Reduced Hilbert space decomposition for non-ideal clocks
   Here, we explain the decomposition in Eq. (2.58) of the main text, establishing that non-ideal
clocks induce a direct sum/integral of TPSs on Hphys .
   Consider the projector Π|1 in Eq. (2.51). It restricts the eigenvalues of H2 + HS on the physical
Hilbert space to
                                    −ϵmax
                                       1   ≤ ES + E2 ≤ −ϵmin 1 .                              (A.19)
Let us first investigate which system energies are compatible with any eigenvalue of H2 . Employing
the extrema of σ2 in the bounds (A.19) implies that for system energies in the range

                                    −ϵmax
                                      1   − ϵmin
                                             2   ≤ ES ≤ −ϵmin
                                                          1   − ϵmax
                                                                 2   ,                                  (A.20)

any eigenvalue of H2 can occur and remain consistent the constraint. This range is nonempty if σ1
contains σ2 . Denoting by ΠS the projector onto this energy range, we have that the tensor product
HC2 ⊗ ΠS (HS ) is a subspace of H|1 .
   Next, let us consider the energy range

                                    −ϵmin
                                      1   − ϵmax
                                             2   < ES ≤ −ϵmin
                                                          1   − ϵmin
                                                                 2 .                                    (A.21)

System energies cannot be larger than the upper bound on the right while still satisfying ES +E2 ∈ −σ1
for some E2 ∈ σ2 . For any fixed ES , the compatible C2 energies are

                                          ϵmin
                                           2   ≤ E2 ≤ −ϵmin
                                                        1   − ES .                                      (A.22)

For any ES in the range (A.20), this imposes no restriction on E2 . However, for ES in the range (A.21)
this is different. Parametrizing such system energies as ES = −ϵmin
                                                                 1 −ϵ2
                                                                      max +δ with 0 < δ ≤ +ϵmax −ϵmin ,
                                                                                             2     2
Eq. (A.22) entails
                                           ϵmin
                                            2   ≤ E2 ≤ ϵmax
                                                         2  − δ,                                 (A.23)



                                                       77
and so the admissible C2 energies becomes squashed from above in an ES -dependent manner. Assuming
σS := Spec(HS ) to be purely continuous, we can thus write these contributions to H|1 as
                                           Z −ϵmin −ϵmin
                                                  1    2             [ϵmin ,−ϵmin
                                                                              1 −ES ]
                              +
                             HSC2
                                  :=                        dE S ΠC22                     (HC2 ) ⊗ HSES ,           (A.24)
                                                −ϵmin max
                                                  1 −ϵ2


         [ϵmin ,−ϵmin −E ]
where ΠC22      1    S
                        is the projector onto the subspace of HC2 compatible with Eq. (A.22) and HSES
is the improper subspace spanned by states with fixed energy ES . When HS is degenerate, as will
typically be the case for modular Hamiltonians of QFTs with multiple species, the tensor product
under the integral will be nontrivial. Hence, HSC +
                                                    2
                                                      is a direct integral of TPSs. When σS is discrete,
this will turn into a direct sum instead.
    Similarly, one treats system energies in the range

                                         −ϵmax
                                           1   − ϵmax
                                                  2   ≤ ES < −ϵmax
                                                               1   − ϵmin
                                                                      2 ,                                           (A.25)

resulting in another direct integral/sum of TPSs
                                           Z −ϵmax −ϵmin
                                                  1    2             [−ϵmax −ES ,ϵmax ]
                              −
                             HSC2
                                  :=                        dE S ΠC2 1            2
                                                                                          (HC2 ) ⊗ HSES .           (A.26)
                                            −ϵmax
                                              1   −ϵmax
                                                    2


This establishes the decomposition in Eq. (2.58).


B     Constraint implementation via the T -map
    Here we briefly check that the T -map in Eq. (3.17) implements the constraint Eq. (3.1) (with
relative minus sign between the clock Hamiltonians as in Eq. (3.11)) also for non-ideal clocks as used
in the main body ([21, Sec. 4.2] used ideal clocks in their implementation).
    We have
                       Z                                       Z
      T2 H |ψ⟩ =             dt e−it(HS +H1 ) |Hψ(t)⟩ =              dt e−it(HS +H1 ) ((HS + H1 ) |ψ(t)⟩ − |H2 ψ(t)⟩)
                        RZ                                       R
                                    −it(HS +H1 )
                  = −            dt e                 (i∂t |ψ(t)⟩ + |H2 ψ(t)⟩) ,                                        (B.1)
                             R

where we used partial integration and that limt→±∞ |ψ(t)⟩ = 0, coming from |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin being square
integrable. Now

                                          |H2 ψ(t)⟩ = ⟨t| H2 |ψ⟩ = −i∂t |ψ(t)⟩ ,                                        (B.2)

where we invoked Eq. (2.1). Hence, reduced states solve the constraint in the sense that

                                            T2 H |ψ⟩ = 0 ,           ∀ |ψ⟩ ∈ Hkin .                                     (B.3)


C     Details of derivation of density operator
    We first demonstrate that
                                                               βHR /2                    −βHR /2
                                        SψR (|φ⟩ ⊗ ⟨ζ|) = e           ī   |ζ⟩ ⊗ ⟨φ| e         ī   .                   (C.1)
                                           ī




                                                                   78
is the Tomita operator of |ψRī ⟩. For any A ∈ B(HRī ), one has
                                                            O Z                                      −βHR /2
                     SψR A |ψRī ⟩ = SψR A                                 dϵj |ϵj ⟩ ⊗ ⟨ϵj | e                       ī                   (C.2)
                          ī                      ī                  σj
                                                           Cj ∈Rī
                                             O Z                                             −βHR /2
                                        =                       dϵj |ϵj ⟩ ⊗ ⟨ϵj | A† e                ī                                  (C.3)
                                            Cj ∈Rī σj
                                             O Z                      Z
                                                                                                                          −βHR /2
                                        =                       dϵj        dϵ′j |ϵj ⟩ ⊗ ⟨ϵj | A† |ϵ′j ⟩ ⟨ϵ′j | e              ī          (C.4)
                                            Cj ∈Rī        σj         σj
                                             O Z                      Z
                                                                                                                          −βHR /2
                                        =                       dϵj        dϵ′j |ϵj ⟩ ⟨ϵj | A† |ϵ′j ⟩ ⊗ ⟨ϵ′j | e              ī          (C.5)
                                            Cj ∈Rī        σj         σj
                                             O Z                                                  −βHR /2
                                        =                       dϵ′j A† |ϵ′j ⟩ ⊗ ⟨ϵ′j | e                  ī                             (C.6)
                                            Cj ∈Rī        σj

                                        = A† |ψRī ⟩ ,                                                                                    (C.7)

as required.
   Next, let us show that the state |Ψ⟩ defined in (4.12) is separating for the algebra AH
                                                                                         SR . Consider
the map
                  γ : HS ⊗       Hj ⊗ Hj∗ ⊗ Hi → HS ⊗             Hj ⊗ Hj∗ ⊗ B(Hi )              (C.8)
                            O                               O             

                                 Cj ∈Rī                                                 Cj ∈Rī

defined by                           Z ∞                                                                        
                     γ : |α⟩ 7→             dt exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )t |α⟩ ⟨t|i eβHi /2 ,                                          (C.9)
                                                                                             ī
                                      −∞

where HRī = Cj ∈Rī Hj , and the ∗ in HR∗ denotes that it is the same operator but acting on the
               P
                                               ī
second copy of the frames Rī , i.e. on Hj∗ . Then one may confirm, using the resolution of the identity
in terms of the clock states |t⟩i , and the fact that (HS + HRī − HR∗ ) |ψSRī ⟩ = 0,
                                                                                                                ī


                                                  γA |Ψ⟩ = A( |ψSRī ⟩ ⊗ 1Ci ),                                                          (C.10)

Since |ψSRī ⟩ is separating, we can have γA |Ψ⟩ = 0 only if A = 0, which implies |Ψ⟩ is separating.
                                                                e SR R∗ C of the projection operator Π
   Let us also show that the state |Ψ⟩ is cyclic over the image H   ī ī i
                                                                                                     e
defined in (4.14). Consider a general operator in the algebra, which may be written in the form
                                               Z ∞
                                        A=                 dt Ui (t)Oi0 (a(t))eβHi /2 ∈ AH
                                                                                         SR ,                                            (C.11)
                                                  −∞

with a : R → AS ⊗ B(HRī ). Then we have
                   Z ∞         Z ∞
       A |Ψ⟩ =           dτ          dt e−iHτ a(t) ⊗ |t⟩i ⟨0|i eiHτ |ψSRī ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩i                                                      (C.12)
                    −∞          −∞
                   Z ∞         Z ∞                                                                   
               =         dτ          dt exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )τ ⟨τ |0⟩i a(t) |ψSRī ⟩ ⊗ |t⟩i                                      (C.13)
                                                                                   ī
                   −∞          −∞
                    Z ∞
               =Π
                e          dt a(t) |ψSRī ⟩ ⊗ |t⟩i ,                                                                                     (C.14)
                     −∞

                                                                                  iHR∗ τ
where in the second line we used ⟨0|i eiHτ |ψSRī ⟩ = ⟨τ |i e                           ī        |ψSRī ⟩ since (HS +HRī −HR∗ ) |ψSRī ⟩ = 0.
                                                                                                                                    ī
Since |ψSRī ⟩ is cyclic for AS ⊗ B(HRī ), we can vary over all states in H
                                                                           e SR R∗ C in this way, so |Ψ⟩ is
                                                                               ī ī i
cyclic over this subspace.




                                                                           79
   Next, we demonstrate that (4.15) is the Tomita operator of |Ψ⟩:
                 Z ∞                                                                                
  SΨ A |Ψ⟩ =              dt eβHi /2 |t⟩i exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )t SψSR ⟨−t|i e−βHi /2 Ae−βHi /2 |0⟩i |ψSRī ⟩
                                                                                                ī                 ī
                  −∞
                                                                                                                                                   (C.15)
                 Z ∞                                                                                
            =             dt eβHi /2 |t⟩i exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )t ⟨0|i e−βHi /2 A† e−βHi /2 |−t⟩i |ψSRī ⟩ (C.16)
                                                                                                ī
                  −∞
                 Z ∞
            =             dt eβHi /2 |t⟩i ⟨t|i e−βHi /2 A† e−βHi /2 |0⟩i |ψSRī ⟩                                                                  (C.17)
                  −∞
                  †
            = A |Ψ⟩ ,                                                                                                                              (C.18)

as required. We then have the modular operator
          †
    ∆Ψ = SΨ SΨ                                                                                                                                     (C.19)
            Z ∞           Z ∞
        =            dt         dt′ e−βHi /2 |−t⟩i Sψ† SR                                                                                          (C.20)
                −∞         −∞                                       ī
                                                                   
                exp i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )(t − t′ ) ⟨t|i eβHi t′ i SψSR −t′ i e−βHi /2
                                                    ī                                                        ī
            Z ∞           Z ∞
                                  ′ −βHi /2
        =            dt         dt e            |−t⟩i ∆ψSR                                                                                         (C.21)
                −∞         −∞                                           ī
                                                                   
                exp i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )(t − t′ )                              t′ i eβHi |t⟩i −t′ i e−βHi /2
                                                    ī
            Z ∞           Z ∞                                                                       
        =            dt         dt′ exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )t eβHi /2 −t′ i ⟨t|0⟩i −t′ i e−βHi /2                                             (C.22)
                                                                                       ī
                −∞         −∞
        = Π.
          e                                                                                                                                        (C.23)

where in the third line we used that
                                                                                                                                       
      exp i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )(t − t′ ) SψSR exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )(t − t′ ) = SψSR ,                                                             (C.24)
                                        ī                         ī                                                       ī                ī


and in the fourth line we changed variables t → t′ − t − iβ. Thus ∆Ψ is the identity (on H
                                                                                         e SR R∗ C ).
                                                                                             ī   i                                                ī

   Next, we show that (4.27) is the relative Tomita operator from |Ψ⟩ to a physical state |ϕ) with
|ϕ|i (τ )⟩ = Ri (τ ) |ϕ). This may be confirmed as follows:
                                                                 Z ∞
                                Sϕ|Ψ A |Ψ⟩ = Πphys                           dt |t⟩i Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR ⟨0|i A |t⟩i |ψSRī ⟩                             (C.25)
                                                                 −∞                                      ī
                                                                 Z ∞
                                               = Πphys                       dt |t⟩i ⟨t|i A† |0⟩i |ϕ|i (0)⟩                                        (C.26)
                                                                 −∞
                                                                 †
                                               = Πphys A |ϕ|i (0)⟩ |0⟩i                                                                            (C.27)
                                                             †                                                          †
                                               = r(A) Πphys |ϕ|i (0)⟩ |0⟩i = r(A) |ϕ) .                                                            (C.28)

Using the identity
                                                                                                                                   
                exp − i(HS +                  Hj )t Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR exp i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )t = Sϕ|i (t)|ψSR ,                                         (C.29)
                                       X
                                                                              ī                                                 ī           ī
                                       j̸=i

we thus have the relative modular operator (naïvely in computing this object we might get a Π2phys ,
but the target space of the relative Tomita operator is the physical Hilbert space, whose inner product
                                     †
we should use when contracting Sϕ|Ψ     with Sϕ|Ψ – this removes one factor of Πphys , as described in




                                                                                   80
Sec. 2.2)
           †
   ∆ϕ|Ψ = Sϕ|Ψ Sϕ|Ψ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (C.30)
                 Z ∞                                                                                                                                       
            =              dt exp i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )(t − iβ/2) |0⟩i Sϕ† (0)|ψSR ⟨t|i                                                                                                                                                         (C.31)
                                                                                         ī                                                                                              |i
                     −∞                                                                                                                                                                                      ī
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                       Z ∞                                                                                  n
                                                                    dt′ exp−i(HS +                                                                    Hj )t′ 
                                                                                                                                            X
                                                         −∞                                                                                 j=1
                     Z ∞                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                             dt′′ t′′ i Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR ⟨0|i exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )(t′′ + iβ/2)
                                                                   ī                                                                                                               ī
                      −∞
                            Z ∞         Z ∞             Z ∞                                                                                                                                            
            = eβHi /2              dt         dt′                       dt′′ exp i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )(t − t′ ) |−t⟩i t′′ t − t′ i                                                                                                                   (C.32)
                                                                      ī
                       −∞       −∞      −∞
                    −1/2                              −1/2
                                                                                           
                 ∆ψSR Sϕ† (−t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR ∆ψSR −t′′ i exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )t′′ eβHi /2
                            |i                     ī                                    ī
                      Z ī∞       
                                     ī                    ī
                                                                    Z ∞      Z ∞
            = eβHi /2       dt exp i(HS + HRī − HR∗ + Hi )t ⟨0|t⟩i       dt′       dt′′                                                                                                                                                           (C.33)
                                                        ī
                       −∞                                              −∞        −∞
                                                      −1/2 †                      −1/2
                                                   
                                                 ′′
                 exp −i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )t ∆ψSR Sϕ (t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR ∆ψSR
                                              ī              |i              ī                                   ī                                           ī                                                     ī
                                                       −iHi t′
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                              ′′                   ′′                                                                                                   ′′
                                                                                                             i exp               i(HS + HRī − HR∗ )t                                                                 βHi /2
                                           ⊗e                            t              i      t                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ī
                              Z
                                                   ′                    −1/2                                                                                                   −1/2
            = Πe
              e βHi /2            dt′ e−iHi t Oi0 (∆ψSR Sϕ† (t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR ∆ψSR )eβHi /2 .                                                                                                                                                 (C.34)
                                                                                   ī              |i                        ī                                       ī                      ī


In the fourth line we changed variables t → t + t′ + t′′ , t′ → −t′ , and t′′ → −t′′ . Note that we can get
rid of the Π
           e at the front, if we treat this as an operator acting on H    e SR R∗ C . To summarise the above,
                                                                                 ī ī i
we have                       Z ∞
                                                    −1/2                                 −1/2
             ∆ϕ|Ψ = eβHi /2        dt e−iHi t Oiτ (∆ψSR Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ∆ψSR )eβHi /2 ,   (C.35)
                                                                                                                                      |i                                                                 ī
                                            −∞                                                                          ī                                                ī                                                ī

where we have also used covariance of the dressed observable to include an additional τ parametrisation.
   We have
                                          −1/2                                                                                              −1/2
                                        ∆ψSR Sϕ† (t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR ∆ψSR ∈ AS ⊗ B(HRī ),                                                                                                                                                      (C.36)
                                               ī            |i                         ī                                       ī                    ī

which is what justifies writing the term in the integrand above as a dressed observable. To see this,
suppose a, b, c ∈ AS ⊗ B(HRī ). Then

                                  ⟨ψSRī | aSψ† SR Sϕ† (t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR SψSR bc |ψSRī ⟩                                                                                                                                                     (C.37)
                                                              ī        |i                              ī                                   ī                      ī

                                         = ⟨ψSRī | bcSϕ† (0)|ψSR Sϕ|i (t′ )|ψSR a |ψSRī ⟩                                                                                                                                                        (C.38)
                                                                                   |i                         ī                                        ī

                                         = ⟨ϕ|i (t′ )| abc |ϕ|i (0)⟩                                                                                                                                                                               (C.39)
                                         = ⟨ψSRī | abSψ† SR Sϕ† (t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR SψSR c |ψSRī ⟩ .                                                                                                                                          (C.40)
                                                                |i                     ī   īī                                       ī


Since |ψSRī ⟩ is cyclic, we may conclude that

                                        Sψ† SR Sϕ† (t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR SψSR ∈ (A ⊗ B(HRī ))′ .                                                                                                                                                 (C.41)
                                              ī         |i                         ī                                       ī                   ī


But we have
        −1/2                                                       −1/2
      ∆ψSR Sϕ† (t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR ∆ψSR = JψSR Sψ† SR Sϕ† (t′ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (0)|ψSR SψSR JψSR ,                                                                                                                                                    (C.42)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                ī    |i          ī                    ī                   ī                               ī                       ī          |i                          ī                                 ī             ī           ī


where JψSR is the modular conjugation of |ψSRī ⟩. Since the modular conjugation gives an isomorphism
          ī
between the algebra and its commutant, we have (C.36).



                                                                                                                   81
   Within the perspective of a clock Ci ∈ R, at time τ , the density operator is given by (4.31). We
can show this as follows:

             ρϕ|i (τ ) = Ri (τ )ρϕ Ri (τ )†                                                                                                                                                                                                      (C.43)
                                                            P                                   Z ∞                                         P
                                       −β(HS +                              Hj )/2                                      i(HS +                              Hj )t
                     = e−S0,R e                                     j̸=i                                     dt e                                    j̸=i                                                                                        (C.44)
                                                                                                     −∞
                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                       −1/2                                                                                             −1/2                     −β(HS +                                 Hj )/2
                                  Π|i ∆ψSR Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ∆ψSR Π|i e                                                                                                           j̸=i
                                                 ī        |i                             ī                             ī                     ī
                                                                           Z ∞
                                 −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                          i(HS +                            Hj )t
                     =e                                              ī                        dt e                           j̸=i                    Π|i Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR Π|i .                                                     (C.45)
                                                                                                                                                                      |i                                                     ī
                                                                             −∞                                                                                                                     ī


Note that
                                                                Z ∞                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                           −i(HS +                                 Hj )t′
     Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR Π|i =                                          dt′ Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR e                                                                                      j̸=i               0 t′ i               (C.46)
        |i                                  ī                                                        |i                                                              ī
                       ī                                        −∞                                                                ī
                                                                Z ∞                                                    P
                                                                                                    −i(HS +                             Hj )t′
                                                           =                     dt′ e                                     j̸=i                      Sϕ† (τ +t−t′ )|ψSR S⟨t′ |0⟩i ϕ|i (τ −t′ )|ψSR .                                             (C.47)
                                                                                                                                                            |i                                                                         ī
                                                                         −∞                                                                                                                    ī


Using this in the formula for ρϕ|i (τ ), and changing variables t → t + t′ , we get
                                                           Z ∞                                                                                                                           Z
                   −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                                          P
                                                                                          i(HS +                       Hj )t
  ρϕ|i (τ ) = e                                       ī                   dt e                               j̸=i                  Π|i Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR                                        dt′ S⟨t′ |0⟩i ϕ|i (τ −t′ )|ψSR . (C.48)
                                                                                                                                                       |i                                                                                   ī
                                                                −∞                                                                                                             ī


But                                    Z
                                            dt′ S⟨t′ |0⟩i ϕ|i (τ −t′ )|ψSR = SΠ|i ϕ|i (τ )|ψSR = Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ,                                                                                                                                 (C.49)
                                                                                                             ī                                                  ī                                           ī

since ϕi (τ ) is in the image of Π|i . So
                                                                                           Z ∞
                                     −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                       i(HS +                          Hj )t †
              ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i e                                                  ī                        dt e                                 j̸=i        Sϕ (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR ,                                                        (C.50)
                                                                                                                                                               |i                      ī
                                                                                                −∞                                                                                                       ī


as required.
     Finally, suppose we decompose the reduced state |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ as in (4.32). Then one has

                                                            Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR =                                                                                                                                                                      (C.51)
                                                                                                           X
                                                                                                                   SϕI (τ )|ψS ⊗ Sϕ̃I (τ )|ψR ,
                                                                                               ī                          S                                                        ī
                                                                                                            I
so
                     Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR =
                                                                                           X †
                                                                                                          SϕI (τ +t)|ψ SϕJ (τ )|ψS ⊗ Sϕ̃† I (τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̃J (τ )|ψR                                                                                (C.52)
                            |i             ī                               ī                               S                          S        S                                                            R                   ī
                                                                                               I,J                                                                                                                 ī


Using
                                    ⟨ψRī | aSϕ̃† I (τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̃J (τ )|ψR b |ψRī ⟩ = ⟨ϕ̃J (τ )| ba |ϕ̃I (τ + t)⟩ ,                                                                                                                              (C.53)
                                                                                 R                                ī
                                                                                     ī

for any a, b ∈ B(HRī ), we may identify
                                                                                                                  βHR∗
                                      Sϕ̃† I (τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̃J (τ )|ψR = e                                                        ī    trRc ( |ϕ̃I (τ + t)⟩ ⟨ϕ̃J (τ )|).                                                                            (C.54)
                                                                R                                    ī
                                                                    ī

Substituting this into the formula for the density matrix, one has
                                            Z ∞                                           P
                                                                          i(HS +                           Hj )t X
 ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i e−S0,R −βHRc                              dt e                                     j̸=i                           Sϕ† I (τ +t)|ψ SϕJ (τ )|ψS ⊗ trRc ( |ϕ̃I (τ + t)⟩ ⟨ϕ̃J (τ )|),
                                                 −∞                                                                                         S                    S         S
                                                                                                                       I,J
                                                                                              (C.55)
as reported in the main text, equation (4.33). A related expression will prove useful when the state
decomposition between QFT and frame factors is expressed in terms of a continuous parameter instead
of a discrete sum:
                                                                                 Z ∞
                                                 |ϕ|i (t)⟩ :=                                       dµ |ϕµS (t)⟩ ⊗ |ϕ̃µR Rc (t)⟩ ∈ H|Ri ,                                                                                                        (C.56)
                                                                                                                                                       ī
                                                                                      −∞


                                                                                                                        82
The direct analogue of equation (C.55) for this state is
                                        Z ∞
                        −S0,R −βHRc                                          i(HS +HR +HRc )t †
         ρϕ|i = Π|i e                               dt dµ dν e                       ī      Sϕν (t)|ψS Sϕµ (0)|ψS
                                                                                                S         S
                                             −∞
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                  ⊗ TrRc |ϕ̃νRī Rc (t)⟩ ⟨ϕ̃µR Rc (0)|
                                                                                                                                      ī
                                        Z ∞                                                                                                                                      (C.57)
              = Π|i e   −S0,R −βHRc
                                                    dµ dν               Sϕ† ν (0)|ψS
                                             −∞                             S
                              Z ∞                                                                                                             
                                              i(HS −HR −HRc )t
                                        dt e                       ī            TrRc               |ϕ̃µR Rc (0)⟩ ⟨ϕ̃νRī Rc (t)|                         Sϕµ (0)|ψS .
                                                                                                         ī                                                   S
                                   −∞

In the second expression we have isolated the t-integral between the relative Tomita operators, which
are taken to act as complex conjugation in the energy bases of the frames. Finally, if we are interested
in cases where the set Rī is empty (so that the algebra considered is just the QFT subregion algebra
dressed by a single frame), then the trace in the above expression becomes an inner product, and we
have
                                  Z ∞                                        Z ∞                                          D                                  E
  ρϕ|i = Π|i e   −S0,R −βHRc
                                        dµ dν            Sϕ† ν (0)|ψS                       dt e    i(HS −HRc )t
                                                                                                                                ϕ̃νRc (t) ϕ̃µRc (0)                Sϕµ (0)|ψS . (C.58)
                                                             S                                                                                                         S
                                   −∞                                            −∞

This expression will be referred to in several computations.


D       Details of semiclassical approximations
    Let us write ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ), where
                                                                        Z ∞
                                  −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                                    P
                                                                                        i(HS +                     Hj )t †
                 ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ) = e                               ī                dt e                        j̸=i        Sϕ (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR .                             (D.1)
                                                                                                                           |i                      ī
                                                                          −∞                                                                         ī


One may confirm that ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ) is Hermitian; since ρϕ|i (τ ) is also Hermitian, we have

                                        Π|i ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ) = ρϕ|i (τ ) = ρϕ|i (τ )† = ρ̃ϕ|i (τ )Π|i ,                                                                                 (D.2)

so ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ) commutes with Π|i , and so we may write

                                                          log ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i log ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ).                                                                                     (D.3)

The entropy of the density matrix may therefore be written

        S[ϕ] = − (ϕ| log ρϕ |ϕ) = − ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| log ρϕ|i (τ ) |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ = − ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| log ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ) |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ .                                                                (D.4)

We will show now that (6.11) holds in the semiclassical regime. First, note that, for any a, b ∈
AU ⊗ B(HRī ), by the definition of the relative Tomita operators, we have

                          ⟨ψSRī |bSϕ† (t+τ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR a|ψSRī ⟩ = (ϕ|OC
                                                                                τ
                                                                                  i
                                                                                    (ab)Vi (t)† |ϕ) ,                                                                             (D.5)
                                        |i                   ī                        ī


so (6.2) implies

    ⟨ψSRī |bSϕ† (t+τ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR a|ψSRī ⟩ ≪ ⟨ψSRī |bSϕ† (τ )|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR a|ψSRī ⟩                                                                  if |t| > O(ϵ).
                |i           ī                ī                                                      |i             ī                   ī
                                                                                                  (D.6)
                                                        †
Since |ψSRī ⟩ is cyclic, it must be that the operator Sϕ(t+τ      S
                                                              )|ψSR ϕ(τ )|ψSR is itself sharply peaked
                                                                                                                           ī                   ī
within |t| < O(ϵ). Thus, one may ignore contributions outside of this window in the integral in (D.1).
Consider

  ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| (ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ))n |ϕ|i (τ )⟩
                                                         Z ∞                                                                                                     n
                         −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                            P
                                                                              i(HS +                   Hj )t †
        = ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| e                              ī                   dt e                   j̸=i        Sϕ (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR                                |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ . (D.7)
                                                                                                               |i                      ī
                                                            −∞                                                                        ī




                                                                                   83
By (6.3), for |t′ | < O(ϵ), we have
          ′                                                     ′
  e−iHS t Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR eiHS t
              |i              ī                ī

                                            = S †−iHS t′                                    Se−iHS t′ ϕ (τ )|ψ               ≈ Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR . (D.8)
                                                     e              ϕ|i (τ +t)|ψSR                            |i     SR
                                                                                                                       ī             |i     ī               ī
                                                                                       ī

Since each of the t integrals that appears in (D.7) is peaked around |t| < O(ϵ), we can use this to
(approximately) commute all the eiHS t factors to the right, where we can then use eiHS t |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ≈
eiEt |ϕ|i (τ )⟩. We thus obtain

  ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| (ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ))n |ϕ|i (τ )⟩
                                                                   Z ∞                                                                           n
                              −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                            P
                                                                                     i(E+              Hj )t †
         ≈ ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| e                                    ī                  dt e             j̸=i        Sϕ (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR                |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ . (D.9)
                                                                                                               |i                      ī
                                                                     −∞                                                          ī


Moreover, by (6.3), in the window |t| < O(ϵ) we can write |ϕ|i (τ + t)⟩ ≈ e−iEt |ϕ̂(τ + t)⟩, where
                                                                                            P
                                                                                      −i               Hj t
                                                         |ϕ̂(τ + t)⟩ = e                        j̸=i          |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ .                                         (D.10)
One therefore has the approximation
                                         ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| (ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ))n |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ≈ ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| (ρ̂ϕ (τ ))n |ϕ̂(τ )⟩                                                       (D.11)

where (using Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR ≈ e−iEt Sϕ̂(τ
                                     †
                                          +t)|ψ
                                                                                 )
                     |i             ī                                    SR
                                                                            ī
                                                                                Z ∞
                                         −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                i             Hj t †
                          ρ̂ϕ (τ ) = e                                    ī           dt e            j̸=i       Sϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR .                        (D.12)
                                                                                 −∞                                          SR          ī
                                                                                                                                      ī

Finally, taking an n derivative of (D.11), and then setting n = 0, one finds
                            S[ϕ] = − ⟨ϕ|i (τ )| log ρ̃ϕ|i (τ ) |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ ≈ − ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| log ρ̂ϕ (τ ) |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ .                                                     (D.13)
In combination with (D.4), this implies (6.11).
   Consider the state |Ψ⟩
                       b defined in (6.14), and let a(HRc ), b(HRc ) be any two elements of A
                                                                                            b (written
as AS ⊗ B(HRī )-valued functions of HRc ). Then we have
                                           b a(HRc )e−βHS ρ̂ (τ )b(HRc ) |Ψ⟩
                                          ⟨Ψ|                                                                                                                      (D.14)
                                                            ϕ
                                                                          b
                                                 1
                                                    Z
                                              =         dE ⟨ψS | trRī (a(E)∆ψ b(E)) |ψS ⟩                                                                         (D.15)
                                                2π σRc
                                                 1
                                                    Z
                                              =         dE ⟨ψS | trRī (b(E)a(E)) |ψS ⟩                                                                            (D.16)
                                                2π σRc
                                                = ⟨Ψ|
                                                   b b(HRc )a(HRc ) |Ψ⟩
                                                                     b ,                                                                                           (D.17)
so e−βHS = ∆Ψ
            b is the modular operator of Ψ. Similarly, we have
   b a(HRc )eS0,R +βHRc ρ̂ (τ )b(HRc ) |Ψ⟩
  ⟨Ψ|                     ϕ
                                         b                                                                   (D.18)
         1
            Z                                      Z ∞                                               
                                         −βHR∗              i(H +E)t †
      =          dE ⟨ψS | trRī a(E)e            ī     dt e Rī          Sϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR b(E) |ψS ⟩ (D.19)
        2π σRc                                       −∞                              SR
                                                                                         ī      ī

         1
            Z                       Z ∞
                                               i(H +E)t †
      =          dE ⟨ψSRī | a(E)         dt e Rī       Sϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR b(E) |ψSRī ⟩               (D.20)
        2π σRc                        −∞                             SR
                                                                        ī            ī

         1
            Z        Z ∞
                                              i(H +E)t †
      =          dE        dt ⟨ψSRī | a(E)e Rī         Sϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR b(E) |ψSRī ⟩               (D.21)
        2π σRc        −∞                                            SR
                                                                       ī            ī

         1
            Z        Z ∞
                                                     i(H +E)t
      =          dE        dt ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| b(E)a(E)e Rī           |ϕ̂(τ + t)⟩                                   (D.22)
        2π σRc        −∞
         1
            Z        Z ∞
      =          dE        dt ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| b(E)a(E)ei(E−HRc )t |ϕ̂(τ )⟩                                          (D.23)
        2π σRc        −∞
        = ⟨ϕ̂(τ )| b(HRc )a(HRc ) |ϕ̂(τ )⟩                                                                                                                         (D.24)


                                                                                       84
which shows that (6.16) holds.

D.1       Linear corrections
   Let us now consider the corrections to (D.13). We start by writing the exact density operator as
                                                        Z ∞                                                                                                              
                         −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                   P
                                                                          i(HS +              Hi )t              †
  ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i e                               ī          dt e                     j̸=i               e−iEt Sϕ̂(τ        S
                                                                                                                      +t)|ψSR ϕ̂(τ )|ψSRī
                                                                                                                                           + Y (t)                          , (D.25)
                                                         −∞                                                                                 ī


where
                                 Y (t) = Sϕ† (τ +t)|ψSR Sϕ|i (τ )|ψSR − Se†−iEt ϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ                                            Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR .                            (D.26)
                                                 |i              ī                      ī                                 SR                                  ī
                                                                                                                                 ī

The small parameter in which we are expanding is η = ∥ϵ(HS − E) |ϕ|i (τ )⟩∥ . By the semiclassical
assumption, for |t| < O(ϵ), we have Y (t) = O(η), so we can write the exact density operator as a
                (0)                              (Y )
dominant part ρϕ|i (τ ) plus an O(η) correction ρϕ|i (τ ):

                                                                 ρϕ|i (τ ) = ρ(0) + δ (Y ) ρ,                                                                                  (D.27)

where
                                                                           Z ∞
                                      −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                                           P
                                                                                         i(HS −E+                       Hi )t †
                      ρ(0) = Π|i e                                   ī            dt e                          j̸=i        Sϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR ,                         (D.28)
                                                               −∞                                                                       SR          ī     ī
                                                              Z ∞
                                      −S0,R     −β(H c +H ∗ )
                                                                                                      P
                                                        R                                i(HS +                  Hi )t
                    δ (Y ) ρ = Π|i e                                               dt e                                  Y (t).                                                (D.29)
                                                                 R
                                                                     ī                                   j̸=i
                                                                              −∞

                                                                                                                                      (0)
We may further expand ei(HS −E)t = 1 + i(HS − E)tei(HS −E)t + . . . in ρϕ|i (τ ) to obtain

  ρ(0) = Π|i ρ̂ϕ (τ )
                                                Z ∞
                    −S0,R −β(HRc +HR∗ )
                                                                                   P
                                                              i(HS −E+                        Hi )t             †
      + Π|i e                              ī            dt ie                         j̸=i           (HS − E)tSϕ̂(τ +t)|ψ
                                                                                                                                                           Sϕ̂(τ )|ψSR + . . . . (D.30)
                                                 −∞                                                                                              SR                  ī
                                                                                                                                                      ī


The second term is O(η) (because the integral is dominated by |t| < O(ϵ)), and the remaining terms
in the ellipsis are O η 2 (here these approximations hold when one computes expectation values of
                         

functions of these operators, in the state |ϕ|i (τ )⟩).
   Using the integral formula
                                        d                                                1   dX(s)   1
                                                                          Z ∞
                                           log X(s) =                           dλ                        ,                                                                    (D.31)
                                        ds                                0          λ + X(s) ds λ + X(s)
we may then Taylor expand to obtain
                             h
          (0)
  log ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i log ρ̂ϕ (τ )
                                         1                                                           1
          Z ∞            Z ∞                                   P                                               i      
                                                             i    Ht †
      +             dt         dλ                 i(HS − E)te j̸=i i Sϕ̂(τ           S                           + O  η2 .
            −∞           0          λ + ∆ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                                                b
                                                                           +t)|ψSR ϕ̂(τ )|ψSRī λ + ∆
                                                                                  ī                  ϕ̂(τ )|Ψ
                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                                                                               (D.32)

By inserting an integral over the projection-valued measure for the energy of the complementary frames
defined in (6.20), and using (6.25), with similar techniques to those used in Section 6.1 this may be
rewritten as
                             h
          (0)
  log ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i log ρ̂ϕ (τ )
                                                            1                                      1
                Z                      Z ∞                                                                 i     
      + 2π               dE P (E)               dλ                    (HS − E)∂E pE ∆ϕE |ψ̄                    + O η 2 . (D.33)
                σR c                   0               λ + pE ∆ϕE |ψ̄                         λ + pE ∆ϕE |ψ̄


                                                                                       85
After a change of variables λ → pE λ, this takes the form
                           h
          (0)
  log ρϕ|i (τ ) = Π|i log ρ̂ϕ (τ )
                                            1                         1                                   1
                 Z                                 Z ∞                                                          i     
          + 2π         dE P (E)                          dλ                   (HS − E)∂E pE ∆ϕE |ψ̄                 + O η 2 . (D.34)
                 σRc                       pE      0              λ + ∆ϕE |ψ̄                         λ + ∆ϕE |ψ̄

Taking an expectation value in the state |ϕ|i (τ )⟩ = |ϕ̂(τ )⟩ thus yields the entropy

                                                                       1                                   1
                           Z               Z ∞                                                                        !
                                                                                                                    
 S[ϕ] = S0 [ϕ]−2π                     dE           dλ ϕE                       (HS − E)∂E pE ∆ϕE |ψ̄               +O η 2 , (D.35)
                               σR c            0                   λ + ∆ϕE |ψ̄                         λ + ∆ϕE |ψ̄

where S0 [ϕ] is the leading order semiclassical contribution.
  To make progress, we will now impose a UV cutoff on the fields, such that we may decompose
HS = Hξ − Hξ′ , and all algebras have well-defined density operators. Then we can write

                                                                     ∆ϕE |ψ̄ = ρE (ρ′ψ̄ )−1 ,                                 (D.36)

where ρE is the density operator for ϕE in the algebra AS ⊗ B(HRī ), and ρ′ψ̄ is the density operator for
                                                                                   ′
ψ̄ in its complement; as in 6.2, we have ρ′ψ̄ = e−βHξ /Zξ . With this, we can decompose the entropy as
                                                                                                   
                                                       S[ϕ] = S0 [ϕ] − δS + δ ′ S + O η 2 ,                                   (D.37)

where

                                                               1                                          1
                 Z                Z ∞                                                                                     !
                                                                                                 
                                                                                             ′ −1
     δS = 2π               dE              dλ ϕE                         (Hξ − E)∂ E   p ρ (ρ
                                                                                        E E ψ̄ )                     ,        (D.38)
                     σRc              0                  λ + ρE (ρψ̄ )
                                                                  ′   −1                            λ + ρE (ρ′ψ̄ )−1
                                                               1                                      1
                 Z                Z ∞                                                                               !
                                                                                             
      ′                                                                    ′             ′ −1
    δ S = 2π               dE              dλ ϕE                         Hξ E∂   p  ρ (ρ
                                                                                   E E ψ̄ )                      .            (D.39)
                     σRc              0                  λ + ρE (ρψ̄ )
                                                                  ′   −1                        λ + ρE (ρ′ψ̄ )−1

   Recognising the dE integrand in δS as
           d                                           d
              log (ρE + s(Hξ − E)∂E (pE ρE ))(ρ′ψ̄ )−1 =    log(ρE + s(Hξ − E)∂E (pE ρE )),                                   (D.40)
           ds                                            ds
we can write it as
                                                                                   1                          1
                                           Z              Z ∞                                                  
                           δS = 2π                   dE             dλ ϕE              (Hξ − E)∂E (pE ρE )        .           (D.41)
                                               σRc            0                 λ + ρE                     λ + ρE

Every operator that appears here is now an element of SS ⊗ B(HRī ), so we can write ϕE (·) as Tr(ρE (·)),
where Tr is the trace on AS ⊗ B(HRī ). Then, using the cyclic property of the trace we have

                                                                                  1      1
                                           Z             Z ∞                                                       
                       δS = 2π                     dE              dλ Tr             ρE      (Hξ − E)∂E (pE ρE )              (D.42)
                                           σR c           0                    λ + ρE λ + ρE
                                           Z
                                = 2π               dE Tr ((Hξ − E)∂E (pE ρE ))                                                (D.43)
                                           σR c
                                           Z
                                = 2π               dE ∂E (pE (ϕE (Hξ ) − E)).                                                 (D.44)
                                           σR c

In the second line, we just did the λ integral.




                                                                                  86
    For δ ′ S, we note that Hξ′ commutes with ρE (ρ′ψ̄ )−1 , so

                                                                        1                                      1
                      Z                 Z ∞                                                                                                !
                                                                                                      
         δ ′ S = 2π            dE                dλ ϕE        Hξ′                 ∂ E   p E ρE (ρ ′ −1
                                                                                                     )                                                   (D.45)
                       σRc              0                         λ + ρE (ρψ̄ )
                                                                           ′   −1                 ψ̄     λ + ρE (ρ′ψ̄ )−1
                      Z                                                                        
             = 2π              dE ϕE Hξ′ (∂E pE + pE ∂E log ρE )                                                                                         (D.46)
                       σ c
                      Z R                                                           
             = 2π              dE pE ϕE Hξ′ ∂E log (pE ρE ) .                                                                                            (D.47)
                       σRc


    So overall we have
                               Z                 h                                                                            i            
     S[ϕ] = S0 [ϕ] − 2π                  dE ∂E pE ϕE (Hξ ) − E                                 − pE ϕE Hξ′ ∂E log (pE ρE )              + O η2 .         (D.48)
                                σRc


E      Comparing density operators to prior work
   For the sake of comparing to works [21] (CLPW) and [24] (JSS), we consider the case of two clock
frames, which we label C and C ′ , both possibly non-ideal. Suppose that in reduced perspective of
clock C ′ at orientation τC ′ = 0, the state is unentangled (up to the affect of the projector) between the
QFT and clock C factors. A frame change map VC ′ →C := dte−itHS |t⟩C ⟨−t|C ′ takes this state to the
                                                              R

perspective of frame C at orientation τC = 0, which we write in terms of an integral decomposition
between QFT and frame C ′ factor:
                                      √
                           |Φ̂⟩|C ′ := N Π|C ′ |Φ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩C                                            (E.1)
                                                                                      Z                                     
                                    |Φ̂⟩|C = V             C ′ →C   |Φ̂⟩|C ′ =            dt ( |ϕµS (t)⟩) ⊗ |ϕ̃µC ′ (t)⟩                                  (E.2)

                                    |ϕµS (t)⟩ := |ϕS (t + µ)⟩ ,                                                                                           (E.3)
                                                   √
                                    |ϕ̃µC ′ (t)⟩ := N ⟨−µ|f ⟩C |µ + t⟩C ′                                                                                 (E.4)

In (E.1) we have included a projector, Π|C ′ , which is necessary if clock C ′ is non-ideal, and a
                                                                                                     −1
normalisation constant, N := ⟨Φ| ⊗ ⟨f |C Π|C ′ |Φ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩C                                                  . In terms of the decomposition (E.2),
the general density matrix for the algebra AH
                                            SC in the perspective of clock C is (see equation (C.58))
                                        Z ∞                                      Z ∞                            D                  E
    ρΦ̂|C = Π|C e−S0,C −βHC ′                        dµ dν Sϕ† ν (0)|ψS                        dtei(HS −HC ′ )t ϕ̃νC ′ (t) ϕ̃µC ′ (0)     Sϕµ (0)|ψS .    (E.5)
                                                                    S                                                                        S
                                            −∞                                        ∞

Plugging in states (E.4) to the central t-integral gives
Z ∞                        D                           E            Z ∞
      dtei(HS −HC ′ )t ϕ̃νC ′ (t) ϕ̃µC ′ (0) = N                            dt ei(HS −HC ′ )t ⟨f |−ν⟩C ⟨−µ|f ⟩C ⟨ν + t|µ⟩C ′
 −∞                                                                  −∞
                                                                                 !
           N
                  Z                                                                                                  Z                                    
                                    −iν(HS −HC ′ −ϵ′C )
         =                 dϵ′C e                               f   ∗
                                                                        (ϵ′C )       Π(HS − HC ′ , −σC ′ )                  dϵC eiµ(HS −HC ′ −ϵC ) f (ϵC ) .
           2π          ′
                      σC                                                                                               σC
                                                                                                                                                          (E.6)
Recall that Π(A, σ) := Θ(A − σmin )Θ(σmax − A)) denotes a projector that limits the operator A to
the spectral range σ. The density operator thus becomes
                      Z ∞                                                                       !
        N
                                    Z
                                                                  ′
ρΦ̂|C =   Π                    dν            dϵ′C e−iν(HS +HC ′ +ϵC ) f (ϵ′C )                      Sϕ† S (0)|ψS Π(HS − HC ′ , −σC ′ )SϕS (0)|ψS
        2π |C        −∞                  ′
                                        σC
                  Z ∞              Z                                                          
                                                      iµ(HS +HC ′ +ϵC ) ∗
              ×                dµ            dϵC e                               f (ϵC ) Π|C e−S0,C −βHC ′
                      −∞             σC

      = 2πN Π|C f (−HS − HC ′ )Sϕ† S (0)|ψS Π(HS − HC ′ , −σC ′ )SϕS (0)|ψS f ∗ (−HS − HC ′ )Π|C e−S0,C −βHC ′ .
                                                                                                                                                          (E.7)

                                                                                      87
In writing the first line we used the convenient fact that the continuous index µ on the QFT contribution
(E.3) can be expressed written as a time translation (because we started with a simple product state):
|ϕµS (t)⟩ = |ϕS (t + µ)⟩. Equation (E.7) gives the density operator in the perspective of frame C.
Conjugating with the inverse of the above frame change map returns from the perspective of clock
C at orientation τC = 0 to that of clock C ′ at orientation τC ′ = 0, providing the density operator
relevant for comparison to CLPW and JSS:

                                     ρΦ|C ′ (τ ′ = 0) := VC→C ′ ρΦ|C (τ = 0) VC ′ →C .                                                                           (E.8)

We use the fact that

                               VC→C ′ F(HS + HC ′ )Π|C ΠC ′ = F(−HC )ΠC Π|C ′ VC→C ′ ,                                                                           (E.9)

and
                               VC→C ′ F(HC ′ )Π|C ΠC ′ = F(−HS − HC )ΠC Π|C ′ VC→C ′ ,                                                                          (E.10)
where F is any bounded function of its argument, and similar identities for VC ′ →C . This leads to the
following expression for the C-perspective density operator:

  ρΦ̂|C ′ = 2πN Π|C ′ f (HC )VC→C ′ Sϕ† S (0)|ψS Π(HS − HC ′ , −σC ′ )SϕS (0)|ψS
                                                                                                VC ′ →C f ∗ (HC )Π|C ′ e−S0,C +β(HS +HC ) . (E.11)

This looks rather different from the expressions of JSS and CLPW. We can find an alternative
expression by manipulating the central terms as follows:

 VC→C ′ Sϕ† S |ψS Π(HS − HC ′ , −σC ′ )SϕS |ψS VC ′ →C
           Z ∞                                               Z ∞                                                            
                                                                                       ′ −it′ (HS −HC ′ )
       =          dte   −itHS
                                |t⟩C ⟨−t|C ′       Sϕ† S |ψS                   dt e                                       ′
                                                                                                                        0 t C ′ SϕS |ψS                         (E.12)
             −∞                                                    −∞
                                                                                        Z ∞                                                       
                                                                                                               ′′
                                                                                                         dt′′ eit HS −t′′ C ′ t′′ C
                                                                                               −∞
           Z ∞                                 1                                                                          1
                                                         −it′ H̃                                                                    ′′
       =         dtdt′ dt′′ e−itHS |t⟩C ∆ϕS |ψS e
                                               2                   S
                                                                           0 t′ C ′ t′′ + t′ t C ′ ∆ϕ2S |ψS eit HS t′′ C                                        (E.13)
           −∞
           Z ∞                                       1                 ′
       =         dtdt′ dt′′ dα e−itHS |t⟩C ∆ϕ2S |ψS e−it H̃S 0 t′ C ′ ⟨α|t⟩C ′                                                                                  (E.14)
           −∞
                                                                                   1             ′′
                                               δ(t′′ + t′ − α)∆ϕ2S |ψS eit HS t′′ C
           Z ∞                                                                           1                 ′
       =         dtdt′ dt′′ dα e−i(t+α)HS |t + α⟩C ⟨0|t⟩C ′ ∆ϕ2S |ψS e−it H̃S 0 t′ C ′                                                                          (E.15)
           −∞
                                                                                                     1             ′′
                                                               δ(t′′ + t′ − α)∆ϕ2S |ψS eit HS t′′ C
                 Z ∞                                       1                                                                             1
                                                                                   ′                                          ext                      ′′
       = Π|C ′         dαdt′ dt′′ e−iαHS |α⟩C ∆ϕ2S |ψS e−it H̃S 0 t′ C ′ α t′′ + t′ C ∆ϕ2S |ψS eit HS t′′ C (E.16)
                  −∞
                                          1
                                                     Z ∞                                                                  1
                (R→σ )     ext                                                 ′               ext                                           ext       (σ →R)
       = Π|C ′ ΠC C e−iHS TC ∆ϕ2S |ψS                          dt′ e−it (H̃S +HC ) 0 t′ C ′ ∆ϕ2S |ψS eiHS TC ΠC C                                               (E.17)
                                                         −∞
                  (R→σC ) −iHS T ext                                                     ext     (σ →R)
       = Π|C ′ ΠC          e        C   Sϕ† S |ψS Πext
                                                   |C ′ SϕS |ψS e
                                                                 iHS TC
                                                                        ΠC C                                   .                                                (E.18)

In (E.12) we have just written out integrals explicitly. In (E.13) we replaced the relative Tomitas with
                                                                           1
relative modular operators using SϕS |ψS = Jϕ|ψ ∆ϕ|ψ2
                                                       and letting the relative conjugation operators act
via complex conjugation in the energy basis on the intermediate frame factors. We also introduced the
notation H̃S := Jϕ|ψ HS Jϕ|ψ . In (E.14), we introduced an additional integral over α and a delta function
δ(t′′ + t′ − α). In (E.15), we shifted t → t + α and then isolated t-dependent terms to the left. In line
(E.16), further isolating the t-dependence allows us to replace the t-integral with the projector Π|C ′ on

                                                                            88
the left. We also write the delta function as if it arises from a bra and ket on an extended/ideal clock C
Hilbert space ⟨α|t′′ + t′ ⟩ext
                           C . This makes the following steps more clear. In line (E.17) we rewrite the α
                                    ext
and t integrals in terms of e±HS TC , with extended clock operators acting on acting an extended/ideal
      ′′
                                                                            (R→σ )
frame C Hilbert space. This requires the inclusion of the projectors ΠC C := σC dϵ |ϵ⟩C ⟨ϵ|ext     C and
                                                                                      R
  (σ →R)
ΠC C     := σC dϵ |ϵ⟩ext
                      C ⟨ϵ|C on the outer sides of these operators, mapping back to the non-ideal clock
             R

C Hilbert space. In line (E.18) we again replace the relative modular operators with relative Tomitas,
which results in the t′ integral giving the projector Πext
                                                       |C ′
                                                            := Π(HS + HCext , −σ ′ ). Finally, employing this
expression in (E.11), we arrive at an expression for the density operator which is more amenable to
comparison with the JSS and CLPW expressions:
                              (R→σC ) −iHS T ext                                     ext   (σ →R) ∗
ρΦ̂|C ′ = 2πN f (HC )Π|C ′ ΠC             e        C    Sϕ† S |ψS Πext
                                                                   |C ′ SϕS |ψS e
                                                                                 iHS TC
                                                                                        ΠC C      f (HC )e−S0,C +β(HS +HC ) .
                                                                                                                       (E.19)


Alternative derivation
    We now give an alternate derivation of the density operator (E.19). We first recall the method
of JSS for deriving density operators in the case of two frames that are both ideal. In this case, the
relevant algebra is
                              ext
                                −iHS TC           ext          ext       ext
                        SC = {e
                       AH               aeiHS TC , eisHC }′′ for a ∈ AS , s ∈ R,                                       (E.20)

where the superscript “ext" again indicates the extension to ideal clock Hilbert spaces and operators.
For any state |Φ̂⟩ ∈ HQFT ⊗ L2 (R) that is cyclic and separating for this algebra, the density operator
may be found by a two step process. First, the modular operator for this state and algebra, ∆ext Φ̂
                                                                                                    , is
identified by ‘solving’ its defining equation:
                                                                                            ext
                                    ⟨Φ̂| âb̂ |Φ̂⟩ = ⟨Φ̂| b̂∆ext
                                                             Φ̂
                                                                 â |Φ̂⟩ ,      â, b̂ ∈ AH
                                                                                          SC .                         (E.21)

For von Neumann factors of type I and II, the modular operator can be written as a product of elements
                   ext                              H ext ′
affiliated with AH
                 SC and elements affiliated with (ASC ) . The former piece is (up to normalisation)
the density operator ρext
                       Φ̂
                          for the algebra:
                                                                               ext                ext
                                ∆ext
                                 Φ̂
                                     = ρext
                                        Φ̂
                                            (ρ′ext
                                              Φ̂
                                                   )−1 ,         ρext
                                                                  Φ̂
                                                                      ∈ AH     ′ext   H   ′
                                                                         SC , ρΦ̂ ∈ (ASC ) ,
                                                                       ext                                           (E.22)
                      Tr ρext
                          Φ̂
                              â = ⟨Φ̂| â |Φ̂⟩ ,             ∀â ∈ AH
                                                                     SC .


                                                                                                                       ext
  If we now consider a non-ideal clock C, with C ′ still ideal, the relevant algebra is then ΠC AH  SC ΠC ,
where ΠC is the projector onto the finite spectral range of the non-ideal clock Hamiltonian HC . Since
       H ext , this is a proper subalgebra of AH ext . This implies that ∆ext continues to satisfy equation
ΠC ∈ ASC                                       SC                         Φ̂
                                                                                                          ext
(E.21) and ρext
            Φ̂
                continues to give the correct expectation values for all â, b̂ ∈ ΠC AH
                                                                                      SC ΠC . Projecting
                                                                       ext
the latter as ΠC ρext
                  Φ̂
                      ΠC renders it an element of ΠC AH
                                                      SC ΠC , which then serves as the density operator
for this projected algebra.
   If we instead take the case that C ′ is non-ideal while C is ideal, the relevant algebra is then
         ext
Π|C ′ AH
       SC . The projector Π|C ′ restricts −(HS + HC ) to the spectral range of HC ′ , since this is the
                                                                  ext ′
constraint-equivalent of HC ′ acting on H|C ′ . Since Π|C ′ ∈ (AH
                                                                SC ) , this projected algebra is not a
                  ext
subalgebra of AH SC , and the same modular operator ∆Φ̂ is not guaranteed to satisfy (E.21) for
                                                            ext

elements of this modified algebra. We might instead try to seek a new modular operator ∆   ˜ for this
                                                                                             Φ̂
projected algebra. This would entail satisfying

                                                            ˜ Π|C ′ â |Φ̂⟩ ,
                        ⟨Φ̂| âΠ|C ′ b̂ |Φ̂⟩ = ⟨Φ̂| b̂Π|C ′ ∆                          â, b̂ ∈ AH
                                                                                                   ext
                                                                                                                       (E.23)
                                                              Φ̂                                 SC .


                                                                 89
However the state |Φ̂⟩ cannot be separating for a projected algebra of this form. In the absence of a
cyclic-separating state, we cannot hope to find the modular operator ∆   ˜ . Instead, we determine to
                                                                          Φ̂
find a relative modular operator ∆Π ′ Φ̂|Φ̂ for the unprojected algebra. This would entail satisfying
                                                          |C

                                                                                                                              ext
                                    ⟨Φ̂| âΠ|C ′ b̂ |Φ̂⟩ = ⟨Φ̂| b̂∆Π                           â |Φ̂⟩ ,           â, b̂ ∈ AH
                                                                                                                             SC                (E.24)
                                                                                  |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂


This relative modular operator will be decomposable as
                                                                                                             ext                    ext
                                   ∆Π                = ρΠ           (ρ′Φ̂ )−1 ,       ρΠ           ∈ AH
                                                                                                      SC ,             ρ′Φ̂ ∈ (AH   ′
                                                                                                                                SC ) ,
                                        |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂        |C ′ Φ̂                        |C ′ Φ̂
                                              
                                                                                                       ext                  ext
                                                                                                                                               (E.25)
                         Tr ρΠ           ′ Φ̂
                                              â = ⟨Φ̂| Π|C ′ â |Φ̂⟩ ,                      SC or Π|C ′ ASC .
                                                                                      ∀â ∈ AH            H
                                    |C


                                                                          ext
The projected operator Π|C ′ ρΠ ′ Φ̂ ∈ Π|C ′ AH
                                              SC will then serve as the density matrix for the projected
                                |C
algebra, continuing to give the right expectation values for all its elements. To find ρΠ ′ Φ̂ we therefore
                                                                                                                                          |C
first find ∆Π       ′ Φ̂|Φ̂
                            satisfying equation (E.24). Using the notation ax := e−ixHS aeixHS , we let
               |C

                                                                                                ext
                                                                      â = aT ext eiuHC ,
                                                                                  C
                                                                                                ext                                            (E.26)
                                                                      b̂ = aT ext eivHC ,
                                                                                  C


with a, b ∈ AS and u, v ∈ R, so that â and b̂ are elements of the unprojected/ideal algebra. For
readability we will hereafter drop the superscript ‘ext’ in the remainer of this section, but all HC
and TC below should be understood as the ideal operators. Elements of the form Π|C ′ â and Π|C ′ b̂
additively generate the algebra Π|C ′ ASC , so we only need to seek ∆Π ′ Φ̂|Φ̂ satisfying equation (E.24)
                                                                        |C
for arbitrary such elements. We first consider the left hand side of that equation. For the frame, we
employ bras and kets in the clock basis unless otherwise specified, and we let f denote the energy-basis
wavefunction while f˜ denotes the time-basis wavefunction.
                           Z
  ⟨Φ̂| âΠ|C ′ b̂ |Φ̂⟩ =       ds′ dsdtχC ′ (−t)f˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) ⟨Φ| s′ C aTC eiuHC e−it(HS +HC ) bTC eivHC |Φ⟩ |s⟩C
      Z
  =       ds′ dsdtχC ′ (−t)f˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) s′ + u s − v + t C ⟨Φ| as′ e−itHS bs−v |Φ⟩
      Z
  =       ds′ dsdtχC ′ (−t)f˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) s′ + u s − v + t C ⟨Ψ| bs−v SΦ|Ψ
                                                                       †
                                                                           eitHS SΦ|Ψ as′ |Ψ⟩
      Z
          ds′ dsdtχC ′ (−t)f˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) ⟨Ψ| ⟨−s + v|C b−v eisHS SΦ|Ψ
                                                                   †                         ′
  =                                                                    eit(HS +HC ) SΦ|Ψ e−is HS a −s′ − u C |Ψ⟩
                    Z                                    
  = ⟨Ψ, v| b−v             dsf˜(s)eis(HS −HC ) SΦ|Ψ
                                                †

              Z                                                    Z                                                
                                                                           ds′ dtf˜∗ (s′ )e−is (HS −HC ) a |Ψ, −u⟩
                                                                                                       ′
                     dteit(HS +HC ) χC ′ (t) SΦ|Ψ
                                     †
  = 2π ⟨Ψ, v| be−iTC HS f (HC − HS )SΦ|Ψ Π|C ′ SΦ|Ψ f ∗ (HC − HS )a |Ψ, −u⟩ .
                                                                                                                                               (E.27)

                                                                                    †
In going from the second to third line, we used ⟨Φ| as′ e−itHS bs−v |Φ⟩ = ⟨Ψ| bs−v SΦ|Ψ eitHS SΦ|Ψ as′ |Ψ⟩.




                                                                                  90
Next we turn to the right hand side of equation (E.24):
                                          Z
    ⟨Φ̂| b̂∆Π               â |Φ̂⟩ =          ds′ dsf˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) ⟨Φ| ⟨s′ |C bTC eivHC ∆Π                                    aTC eiuHC |Φ⟩ |s⟩C
               |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂                                                                                         |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂
        Z
    =       ds′ dsf˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) ⟨Φ| ⟨s′ + v|C bs′ ∆Π                                as−u |Φ⟩ |s − u⟩C
                                                                        |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂
        Z
    =       ds′ dsf˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) ⟨Ψ| ⟨s′ + v|C SΨ
                                                † †
                                                  SΦ|Ψ bs′ ∆Π                                       as−u SΦ|Ψ SΨ |Ψ⟩ |s − u⟩C
                                                                                       |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂
        Z                                                                                                                                           (E.28)
    =       ds′ dsf˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) ⟨Ψ| ⟨s′ + v|C bs′ SΨ
                                                    † †
                                                      SΦ|Ψ ∆Π                                      S S a
                                                                                            ′ Φ̂|Φ̂ Φ|Ψ Ψ s−u
                                                                                                              |Ψ⟩ |s − u⟩C
                                                                                       |C
        Z
    =       ds′ dsf˜∗ (s′ )f˜(s) ⟨Ψ, v| be           is′ (H   C +HS )    † †
                                                                        SΨ SΦ|Ψ ∆Π                       SΦ|Ψ SΨ e−is(HC +HS ) a−u |Ψ, −u⟩
                                                                                            |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂
                                † †
    = 2π ⟨Ψ, v| bf ∗ (HC + HS )SΨ SΦ|Ψ ∆Π                                      SΦ|Ψ SΨ f (HC + HS )e−iTC HS a |Ψ, −u⟩
                                                                  |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂


We have used that SΦ|Ψ SΨ is an element affiliated with A′S . Putting together equations (E.27) and
(E.28) allows us write ∆Π ′ Φ̂|Φ̂ as
                                          |C


                                            †    †           1                             †
                    ∆Π                   = SΨ|Φ SΨ                   e−iTC HS f (HC − HS )SΦ|Ψ
                            |C ′ Φ̂|Φ̂                f ∗ (HC + HS )
                                                                                 1
                                         Π|C ′ SΦ|Ψ f ∗ (HC − HS )eiTC HS              SΨ SΨ|Φ
                                                                          f (HC + HS )
                                 − β (HC +HS )  β                                                                                                  (E.29)
                        †    † e 2                                      −1/2 1/2 †
                     = SΨ|Φ SΨ ∗                e 2 HC f (HC )e−iTC HS ∆Ψ ∆Φ|Ψ JΦ|Ψ
                               f (HC + HS )
                                                                                                                  − β (HC +HS )
                                                       1/2       −1/2 iTC HS ∗                           β        e 2
                                         Π|C ′ JΦ|Ψ ∆Φ|Ψ ∆Ψ             e             f (HC )e 2 HC                                    SΨ SΨ|Φ
                                                                                                                  f (HC + HS )
The second expression is arranged so that terms inside brackets are affiliated with ASC while those
outside the brackets are affiliated with A′SC . This is straightforward to see for the terms outside the
brackets, by recalling that SΨ SΨ|Φ is affiliated with A′SC , as are any functions of the combination
HC + HS . To see that the terms inside the brackets are affiliated with ASC , note that although Π|C ′
is itself affiliated with A′SC , it can be written as

    Π(HS + HC , −σC ′ ) = e−iTC HS Π(HC , −σC ′ )eiTC HS = JΨ eiTC HS Π(HC , −σC ′ )e−iTC HS JΨ                                                     (E.30)

The terms in brackets in (E.29) may then be written as
                                 β                               −1/2       1/2
                             e 2 HC f (HC )e−iTC HS ∆Ψ                   ∆Φ|Ψ JΨ|Φ JΨ eiTC HS
                                                                                                                                      β
                                                                                                                                                    (E.31)
                                                                                        1/2         −1/2 iTC HS ∗
                                 × Π(HC , −σC ′ )e−iTC HS JΨ JΦ|Ψ ∆Φ|Ψ ∆Ψ                                    e          f (HC )e 2 HC .
                                               1/2   −1/2               −1/2         1/2
The combinations JΨ JΦ|Ψ ∆Φ|Ψ ∆Ψ      and ∆Ψ ∆Φ|Ψ JΨ|Φ JΨ are both affiliated with A (see, e.g. [24]
appendix C), so conjugating them with e±iTC HS results in operators affiliated AH    SC . All the other
terms, including the projector in the middle, are now functions of HC and are therefore affiliated
with ASC . Given that the full term in brackets in (E.29) is affiliated with ASC , the relative modular
operator may be completely factorised between ASC and A′SC :

                                            †    †      e−β(HC +HS )
                   ∆Π                    = SΨ|Φ SΨ                    SΨ SΨ|Φ
                            |C   ′ Φ̂|Φ̂
                                                      |f (HC + HS )|2                                                                               (E.32)
                                      β                                         †                                 β
                                                                 −iTC HS
                                 ×e   2
                                        (HS +HC )
                                                     f (HC )e                  SΦ|Ψ Π|C ′ SΦ|Ψ eiTC HS f ∗ (HC )e 2 (HS +HC ) .

   After some minor simplifications we therefore find
                                                                                         †
                                                 ρ′Φ̂ = SΦ|Ψ JΨ |f (HC + HS )|2 eβHC JΨ SΦ|Ψ                                                        (E.33)


                                                                                 91
as the density matrix for the commutant algebra, which equivalent to JSS equation 5.21. The second
                                                 ext
line of (E.32) gives the density operator for AHSC in the state Π|C ′ |Φ̂⟩, which upon projection with
                                                          ext
Π|C ′ acts as the density matrix for the algebra Π|C ′ AH
                                                        SC :

                              β                             †                                 β
         ρΠ          = Π|C ′ e 2 (HS +HC ) f (HC )e−iTC HS SΦ|Ψ Π|C ′ SΦ|Ψ eiTC HS f ∗ (HC )e 2 (HS +HC ) .   (E.34)
           |C ′ Φ̂


Recalling that all operators in this expression are extended/ideal operators, conjugating this density
operator with projectors ΠC , Π|C ′ , to the appropriate reduced Hilbert space H|C ′ then gives an
expression equivalent to equation (E.19) from the previous subsection.


F    Details of the gravitational interferometer example
    In this appendix we will give a more detailed account of the calculations involved in section 8.1
concerning the “gravitational interferometer” example. Before considering that particular state, we
will consider density operators associated with a broader (but still very special) class of states, namely
those which appear completely or approximately unentangled from the perspective of a specified frame.
Despite being very special, these states provide a paradigmatic example of the perspective-dependence
of certain properties, particularly those related to entanglement. We will first consider the density
operators associated with such states (for two different gauge invariant algebras) without imposing any
semiclassicality conditions. Then, in order to compute entropies, we will need to further specify a state
and make several approximations. Here we will make assumptions that run broadly parallel to the
semiclassical assumptions of section 6, but are slightly different. Finally, we will finally restrict to the
state used in the “gravitational interferometer” example of section 8.1, which is one such approximate
product state.

Approximate product states: C1 perspective versus C2 perspective
   Consider the case of three frames, {C1 , C2 , C3 }. We stipulate that in the perspective of frame C1 ,
the state exhibits no explicit entanglement across factors:
                                               √
                                    |ϕ|1 (0)⟩ = N Π|1 |ϕS ⟩ |f ⟩2 |g⟩3 .                           (F.1)
                                                  
Here N = ⟨ϕS | ⟨f |2 ⟨g|3 Π|1 |ϕS ⟩ |f ⟩2 |g⟩3 is an overall normalisation factor, while we take the states
on each factor to be individually normalised: ⟨ϕS |ϕS ⟩ = ⟨f |f ⟩2 = ⟨g|g⟩3 = 1. We will also let f and
g represent the energy basis wavefunctions on the frame factors, for example |f ⟩2 = σ2 dϵf (ϵ) |ϵ⟩2 .
                                                                                             R

We say that the state (F.1) exhibits no “explicit" entanglement because if clock 1 is non-ideal, the
projector Π|1 is nontrivial, and the reduced Hilbert space does not have simple tensor product structure.
This inhibits our ability to discuss entanglement across factors because the state space does not fully
factorise (see appendix A.4 for discussion of how a projected Hilbert space can be decomposed as a
direct integral or sum of tensor product factorizations). Nevertheless, considering their structure on
the extended (prior to projection) Hilbert space, these states are unentangled “up to” the effect of the
projector, and becomes completely unentangled in the limit of an ideal frame C1 .
   A state which is approximately unentangled in the perspective of one frame will generically be
highly entangled from the perspective of another frame. The frame-change map (2.53) allows us to
map the state (F.1) to the perspective of another frame (we consider frame C2 ), meaning from the




                                                             92
reduced Hilbert space H|1 to the reduced Hilbert space H|2 :
                   0,0
     |ϕ|2 (0)⟩ = V1→2  |ϕ|1 (0)⟩
                 √         Z ∞
                                     −it(HS +H1 +H2 +H3 )
                                                               Z ∞
                                                                           ′
               = N ⟨0|2          dte                      |0⟩1     dt′ e−it (HS +H2 +H3 ) 0 t′ 1 |ϕS ⟩ |f ⟩2 |g⟩3
                                        −∞                                          −∞
                         √             Z ∞        Z ∞
                 =           N ⟨0|2          dt         dt′ e−it(HS +H2 +H3 ) t − t′ 1 −t′ 0 1 |ϕS ⟩ |f ⟩2 |g⟩3
                                        −∞        −∞
                         √       Z ∞
                 =           N         dte−it(HS +H3 ) |ϕS ⟩ |t⟩1 ⟨−t|f ⟩2 |g⟩3                                                      (F.2)
                                 −∞
                         √
                 =           2πN Π|2 f (−HS − H1 − H3 ) |ϕS ⟩ |0⟩1 |g⟩3

The last two lines give alternate expressions that may both be useful. These make apparent that the
state is generically entangled between the QFT and remaining frame factors. The states (F.1) and
(F.2) descend from the same physical state under different gauge fixings. The statement that these
represent “unentangled" and “entangled" states, respectively, refers to the tensor product structure of
the extended (unprojected) reduced Hilbert spaces.

Density operators: exact expressions
    We will now consider the reduced density operators associated with two different gauge invariant
algebras, those of the QFT subregion operators dressed with respect to frame C1 or frame C2 , along
with reorientations of the same frame. We have elsewhere denoted these algebras AH       SC1 and ASC2 .
                                                                                                    H

In section 4 (and appendix C), we derived a general density matrix expression for the algebra AH     SR
(or rather its representation on the physical Hilbert space, r(AH
                                                                SR )) in the perspective  of a frame R i,
where R = Ri ∪ Rī is any subset of the frames and Ri is any one of its members. In the case that
there is only one frame in R (so that Rī is empty) the density operator is (C.58), expressed in terms
of the state decomposition (C.56). These expressions cover the cases of interest here (algebras r(AHSC1 )
and r(ASC2 )), under different interpretations of R and R .
         H                                                c


   We first focus on r(AHSC1 ). This means taking R = {C1 } and R = {C2 , C3 }. To proceed we must
                                                                  c

write the state from the perspective of C1 , equation (F.1), in terms of the decomposition (C.56).
Explicitly writing out the projector Π|1 on this state leads to:
                                           Z ∞                               √                                       
                          |ϕ|1 (0)⟩ =             dµ e−iµHS |ϕS ⟩ ⊗                 N ⟨0|µ⟩1 e−iµ(H2 +H3 ) |f ⟩2 |g⟩3                (F.3)
                                             −∞
                                   =⇒
                          |ϕµS (t)⟩ := e−i(µ+t)HS |ϕS ⟩ = |ϕ(µ + t)⟩S ,                                                              (F.4)
                                           √
                          |ϕ̃µC2 C3 (t)⟩ := N ⟨0|µ⟩1 e−i(µ+t)(H2 +H3 ) |f ⟩2 |g⟩3 .                                                  (F.5)

It will be useful to work out the central time integral that appears in the density operator expression
(C.58) using the state (F.5). With the abbreviation H̄1′ := HS − H2 − H3 , this gives
   Z ∞                                                       Z ∞
               iH̄1′ t                                                     ′
         dte             ⟨ϕ̃νC2 C3 (t)|ϕ̃µC2 C3 (0)⟩ = N           dteiH̄1 t ⟨ν|0⟩1 ⟨0|µ⟩1 ⟨f |2 ⟨g|3 ei(ν+t−µ)(H2 +H3 ) |f ⟩2 |g⟩3
    −∞                                                        −∞
                           N
                                  Z
                                                                                                                ′           ′   ′
                         =             dϵ1 dϵ′1 dϵ2 Π(H̄1′ + ϵ2 , −σ3 )|f (ϵ2 )|2 |g(−H̄1′ − ϵ2 )|2 eiν(ϵ1 −H̄1 ) e−iµ(ϵ1 −H̄1 ) .
                           2π
                                                                                                                                     (F.6)

In the last line, Π(O, σ) denotes the projector that restricts the operator O to the spectral range σ.
Each energy integral in this expression ranges over its full spectra, implicitly specified by the subscripts
on the integration parameters ϵi . We now insert this expression into the full density operator, leading


                                                                          93
to
                                              Z ∞
           N −S0,1 −β(H2 +H3 )
 ρϕ|1 =       e                Π|1                   dµ dν Sϕ† S (ν)|ψS
           2π                                   −∞
               Z                                                                                                              
                                                                                                ′         ′    ′
           ×             dϵ1 dϵ′1 dϵ2 Π(H̄1′ + ϵ2 , −σ3 )|f (ϵ2 )|2 |g(−H̄1′ − ϵ2 )|2 eiν(ϵ1 −H̄1 ) e−iµ(ϵ1 −H̄1 )                    SϕS (µ)|ψS
                                              Z ∞
           N −S0,1 −β(H2 +H3 )
                                                              Z                                      
       =      e                Π|1                     dν              dϵ1 e−iν(ϵ1 +HS +H2 +H3 ) Sϕ† S (0)|ψS
           2π                                     −∞          σ1
               Z                                                                                    Z ∞            Z                                       
                                                                                                                                   ′
           ×            dϵ2 Π(H̄1′ + ϵ2 , −σ3 )|f (ϵ2 )|2 |g(−H̄1′ − ϵ2 )|2 SϕS (0)|ψS                         dµ        dϵ′1 eiµ(ϵ1 +HS +H2 +H3 )
                   σ2                                                                                    −∞         σ1
                                                          Z
       = 2πN e−S0,1 −β(H2 +H3 ) Π|1 Sϕ† S |ψS                      dϵ2 Π(H̄1′ + ϵ2 , −σ3 )|f (ϵ2 )|2 |g(−H̄1′ − ϵ2 )|2 SϕS |ψS Π|1 .
                                                            σ2
                                                                                                                                                        (F.7)
Moving to the second expression we’ve brought the µ and ν-dependent terms outside of the relative
Tomitas, using the fact that e−iHS ν Sϕ† S (0) eiHS ν = Sϕ† S (ν) . The integrals in round brackets then reduce
to projectors Π|1 := Π(HS + H2 + H3 , −σ1 ), simplifying the final expression.
   We now repeat the above steps for the r(AHSC2 ) algebra. This means we now take R = {C2 } and
R = {C1 , C3 }. We must express the state from clock C2 perspective, equation (F.2), in terms of a
 c

decomposition across frame and QFT factors:
                                            Z ∞                                      √                                     
                             |ϕ|2 (0)⟩ =          dµ e−iµHS |ϕS ⟩ ⊗                         N |µ⟩1 ⟨−µ|f ⟩2 e−iµH3 |g⟩3                                 (F.8)
                                             −∞
                                     =⇒
                             |ϕµS (t)⟩ := e−i(µ+t)HS |ϕS ⟩ = |ϕ(µ + t)⟩S                                                                                (F.9)
                                              √
                             |ϕ̃µC1 C3 (t)⟩ := N |µ + t⟩1 ⟨−µ|f ⟩2 e−i(µ+t)H3 |g⟩3 .                                                                   (F.10)
Employing (F.10) in the central time integral, with the abbreviation H̄2′ := HS − H1 − H3 , we have
     Z ∞                                                      Z ∞
                    ′                                                              ′
           dteiH̄2 t ⟨ϕ̃νC1 C3 (t)|ϕ̃µC1 C3 (0)⟩ = N                    dteiH̄2 t ⟨f |−ν⟩2 ⟨−µ|f ⟩2 ⟨ν + t|µ⟩1 ⟨g|3 ei(ν+t−µ)H3 |g⟩3
      −∞                                                          −∞
                            N
                                 Z
                                                                                                                                  ′         ′      ′
                          =          dϵ1 dϵ2 dϵ′2 Π(H̄2′ + ϵ1 , −σ3 )f ∗ (ϵ2 )f (ϵ′2 )|g(−H̄2′ − ϵ1 )|2 eiν(ϵ2 −H̄2 ) e−iµ(ϵ2 −H̄2 ) .
                            2π
                                                                                                                                                       (F.11)
Plugging this into the density operator for the case of r(AH
                                                           SC2 ) gives
                                               Z ∞
           N −S0,2 −β(H1 +H3 ))
                                                              Z                                                
 ρϕ|2 =       e                 Π|2                     dν             dϵ2 f (ϵ2 )e−iν(ϵ2 +HS +H1 +H3 ) Sϕ† S (0)|ψS
           2π                                      −∞             σ2
               Z                                                                            Z ∞         Z                                              
                                                                                                                                ′
                        dϵ1 Π(H̄2′ + ϵ1 , −σ3 )|g(−H̄2′ − ϵ1 )|2 SϕS (0)|ψS                         dµ        dϵ′2 f ∗ (ϵ′2 )eiµ(ϵ2 +HS +H1 +H3 )
               σ1                                                                              −∞        σ2
                                                                        Z
       = 2πN e          −S0,2 −β(H1 +H3 )
                                            Π|2 f (H̄2 )Sϕ† S |ψS             dϵ1 Π(H̄2′ + ϵ1 , −σ3 )|g(−H̄2′ − ϵ1 )|2 SϕS |ψS f ∗ (H̄2 )Π|2 .
                                                                         σ2
                                                                                                                                                       (F.12)

In the last line, we’ve also defined H̄2 := −HS − H1 − H3 as the constraint-equivalent of H2 on H|2 .
     Collecting results from (F.7) and (F.12) we have:

                                                          Z
 ρϕ|1 = 2πN e−S0,1 −β(H2 +H3 )) Π|1 Sϕ† S |ψS                      dϵ2 Π(H̄1′ + ϵ2 , −σ3 )|f (ϵ2 )|2 |g(−H̄1′ − ϵ2 )|2 SϕS |ψS Π|1 ,
                                                              σ2
                                                                        Z
 ρϕ|2 = 2πN e−S0,2 −β(H1 +H3 ) Π|2 f (H̄2 )Sϕ† S |ψS                          dϵ1 Π(H̄2′ + ϵ1 , −σ3 )|g(−H̄2′ − ϵ1 )|2 SϕS |ψS f ∗ (H̄2 )Π|2 ,
                                                                         σ1
                                                                                                                                                       (F.13)

                                                                               94
where H̄1′ := HS − H2 − H3 , H̄2′ := HS − H1 − H3 , and H̄2 := −HS − H1 − H3 . Recall that these are the
density operators for algebras r(AH  SC1 ) and r(ASC2 ), respectively, for the same physical state, which
                                                  H

is distinguished by the fact that in the perspective of clock C1 it looks approximately unentangled
(equation (F.1)).


G     Linear expansion of the symmetric BCH-formula
   The density operators in Subsect. 8.1 in general contain non-commuting operators. Essentially,
these are the relative modular Hamiltonian HϕS |ψS and the modular Hamiltonian HS related to the
KMS-state ψS . To calculate the entropy, we need to take the logarithm of a product of exponentials of
such operators, which can be done with the BCH formula. A direct application of this will involve
nested commutators of HS and HϕS |ψS , but without further conditions on these operators, one cannot
be certain that the BCH formula converges.
   However, a useful expansion can be performed when one of the operators can be expanded in a
small parameter, allowing us to consider corrections to the leading order/commuting piece. This is
true for the second density operator in the gravitational interferometer we consider in Subsect. 8.1
                                                                                                                                 
  For this purpose, we make use of the following well-known form of the BCH-formula for log eX eY
which one writes as a nested commutator expansion acting on powers of Y
                                       adX           
                    log eX eY       =X+         Y + O  Y 2 , adX (Y ) := [X, Y ] ,         (G.1)
                                      1 − e−adX
in which adX is the adjoint action by X. The second term here may be functionally expanded as
                                                x          x x2
                                                     = 1 +  +   − ...,                                                       (G.2)
                                             1 − e−x       2 12
                                                                                              
The leading order piece here gives for commuting operators log eX eY                                = X + Y as expected. In the
                                                                                                                             
more general case, one can omit terms in (G.1) of order Y 2 , to obtain an expansion of log eX eY                                 in
terms of nested commutators of X with Y .
    We will also need the following general formula in order to switch orders
                                                                                
                                            log eX eY        = − log e−Y e−X ,                                               (G.3)

which is a special case of log(x) = − log x       −1     .
                                                     

                                                                                                                    †
   We now turn our attention
                              towards
                                       the structure we are interested in, namely eY eX eY . We start
                               †
by applying (G.1) to log e e
                          X  Y     and then switch the order through (G.3) to apply it a second time.
This leads to
                                                                                                    !
                                                                     adX
                           
                               Y X Y†
                                                            −X−           Y † +O(Y †2 )       −Y
                      log e e e             = − log e              1−e−adX                 e

                                            adX          adX
                                            =X+    Y†−          Y + O(Y 2 ).                                                 (G.4)
                                          1−e −adX     1 − eadX
Where in the last line we made the approximation
                                             adX
                                    −X −             Y † = −X + O(Y ),                              (G.5)
                                         1 − e−adX
since this will act again on Y through the adjoint action. This expression can be rewritten in a slightly
more useful form
                                         adX          adX              1
                                                         
                         Y X Y†
                               
                   log e e e      ≈X+          coth        (Y + Y † ) − adX (Y − Y † ),             (G.6)
                                           2           2               2
which is the one mentioned in the main body for the gravitational interferometer in Subsect. 8.1.

                                                               95
References
 [1] J. De Vuyst, S. Eccles, P. A. Höhn, and J. Kirklin, Gravitational entropy is observer-dependent,
     (2024), [2405.00114].
 [2]   J. D. Bekenstein, Black holes and the second law, Lett. Nuovo Cim. 4 (1972), 737–740.
 [3]   S. W. Hawking, Particle Creation by Black Holes, Commun. Math. Phys. 43 (1975), ed. by
       G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking, [Erratum: Commun.Math.Phys. 46, 206 (1976)], 199–220.
 [4] S. Ryu and T. Takayanagi, Holographic Derivation of Entanglement Entropy from the anti–de
     Sitter Space/Conformal Field Theory Correspondence, Physical Review Letters 96.18 (2006),
     issn: 1079-7114.
 [5]   A. Lewkowycz and J. Maldacena, Generalized gravitational entropy, Journal of High Energy
       Physics 2013.8 (2013), issn: 1029-8479.
 [6]   T. Faulkner, A. Lewkowycz, and J. Maldacena, Quantum corrections to holographic
       entanglement entropy, Journal of High Energy Physics 2013.11 (2013), issn: 1029-8479.
 [7] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, Quantum extremal surfaces: holographic entanglement entropy
     beyond the classical regime, Journal of High Energy Physics 2015.1 (2015), issn: 1029-8479.
 [8]   A. Strominger and C. Vafa, Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy, Physics
       Letters B 379.1–4 (1996), 99–104, issn: 0370-2693.
 [9]   K. A. Meissner, Black-hole entropy in loop quantum gravity, Classical and Quantum Gravity
       21.22 (2004), 5245–5251, issn: 1361-6382.
[10]   E. Witten, APS Medal for Exceptional Achievement in Research: Invited article on
       entanglement properties of quantum field theory, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90 (4 2018), 045003.
[11]   J. Sorce, Notes on the type classification of von Neumann algebras, Rev. Math. Phys. 36.02
       (2024), 2430002, [2302.01958].
[12]   M. Takesaki, Theory of Operator Algebras I , Springer New York, 1979, isbn: 9781461261889.
[13]   L. Susskind and J. Uglum, Black hole entropy in canonical quantum gravity and superstring
       theory, Physical Review D 50.4 (1994), 2700–2711, issn: 0556-2821.
[14]   T. Jacobson, Black Hole Entropy and Induced Gravity, 1994, [gr-qc/9404039].
[15]   V. Frolov, D. Fursaev, and A. Zelnikov, Statistical origin of black hole entropy in induced
       gravity, Nuclear Physics B 486.1 (1997), 339–352, issn: 0550-3213.
[16]   V. P. Frolov and D. V. Fursaev, Thermal fields, entropy and black holes, Classical and
       Quantum Gravity 15.8 (1998), 2041.
[17]   S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, Causal connectability between quantum systems and the black hole
       interior in holographic duality, Phys. Rev. D 108.8 (2023), 086019, [2110.05497].
[18] S. A. W. Leutheusser and H. Liu, Emergent Times in Holographic Duality, Phys. Rev. D 108.8
     (2023), 086020, [2112.12156].
[19]   E. Witten, Gravity and the crossed product, JHEP 10 (2022), 008, [2112.12828].
[20]   A. Connes, Une classification des facteurs de type III, fr, Annales scientifiques de l’École
       Normale Supérieure 4e série, 6.2 (1973), 133–252.
[21] V. Chandrasekaran, R. Longo, G. Penington, and E. Witten, An algebra of observables for de
     Sitter space, JHEP 02 (2023), 082, [2206.10780].
[22]   V. Chandrasekaran, G. Penington, and E. Witten, Large N algebras and generalized entropy,
       Journal of High Energy Physics 2023.4 (2023), issn: 1029-8479.
[23]   J. Kudler-Flam, S. Leutheusser, and G. Satishchandran, Algebraic Observational Cosmology,
       (2024), [2406.01669].

                                                  96
[24] K. Jensen, J. Sorce, and A. J. Speranza, Generalized entropy for general subregions in quantum
     gravity, JHEP 12 (2023), 020, [2306.01837].
[25] M. Ali and V. Suneeta, A local Generalized second law in crossed product constructions, (2024),
     [2404.00718].
[26]   M. S. Klinger and R. G. Leigh, Crossed products, extended phase spaces and the resolution of
       entanglement singularities, Nucl. Phys. B 999 (2024), 116453, [2306.09314].
[27] T. Faulkner and A. J. Speranza, Gravitational algebras and the generalized second law, JHEP
     11 (2024), 099, [2405.00847].
[28] S. Ali Ahmad and R. Jefferson, Crossed product algebras and generalized entropy for subregions,
     SciPost Phys. Core 7 (2024), 020, [2306.07323].
[29]   J. Kirklin, Generalised second law beyond the semiclassical regime, (2024), [2412.01903].
[30] J. Kudler-Flam, S. Leutheusser, and G. Satishchandran, Generalized Black Hole Entropy is von
     Neumann Entropy, (2023), [2309.15897].
[31]   E. Witten, A background-independent algebra in quantum gravity, JHEP 03 (2024), 077,
       [2308.03663].
[32]   J. Kudler-Flam, S. Leutheusser, A. A. Rahman, G. Satishchandran, and A. J. Speranza, A
       covariant regulator for entanglement entropy: proofs of the Bekenstein bound and QNEC ,
       (2023), [2312.07646].
[33]   E. Gesteau, Large N von Neumann algebras and the renormalization of Newton’s constant,
       (2023), [2302.01938].
[34]   V. Balasubramanian and C. Cummings, The entropy of finite gravitating regions, (2023),
       [2312.08434].
[35] R. M. Soni, A type I approximation of the crossed product, JHEP 01 (2024), 123, [2307.12481].
[36]   S. E. Aguilar-Gutierrez, E. Bahiru, and R. Espíndola, The centaur-algebra of observables,
       JHEP 03 (2024), 008, [2307.04233].
[37]   C. Gomez, Entanglement, Observers and Cosmology: a view from von Neumann Algebras,
       (2023), [2302.14747].
[38]   C. Gomez, Clocks, Algebras and Cosmology, (2023), [2304.11845].
[39]   M. S. Klinger and R. G. Leigh, Crossed Products, Conditional Expectations and Constraint
       Quantization, (2023), [2312.16678].
[40]   J. De Vuyst, S. Eccles, P. A. Höhn, and J. Kirklin, Linearization (in)stabilities and crossed
       products, Journal of High Energy Physics 2025.5 (2025), issn: 1029-8479.
[41] D. Brill and S. Deser, Instability of Closed Spaces in General Relativity, Commun. Math. Phys.
     32 (1973), 291.
[42]   V. Moncrief, Spacetime symmetries and linearization stability of the Einstein equations. I ,
       Journal of Mathematical Physics 16.3 (1975), 493–498, issn: 0022-2488.
[43] V. Moncrief, Space-Time Symmetries and Linearization Stability of the Einstein Equations. 2.,
     J. Math. Phys. 17 (1976), 1893–1902.
[44]   V. Moncrief, Invariant States and Quantized Gravitational Perturbations, Phys. Rev. D 18
       (1978), 983–989.
[45]   V. Moncrief, Quantum linearization instabilities, Gen. Rel. Grav. 10 (1979), 93–97.
[46]   J. M. Arms, Linearization stability of the Einstein–Maxwell system, Journal of Mathematical
       Physics 18.4 (1977), 830–833, issn: 0022-2488.




                                                  97
[47] J. M. Arms, Linearization stability of gravitational and gauge fields, J. Math. Phys. 20 (1979),
     443–453.
[48]   A. E. Fischer, J. E. Marsden, and V. Moncrief, The structure of the space of solutions of
       Einstein’s equations. I. One Killing field, in: Annales de l’institut Henri Poincaré. Section A,
       Physique Théorique, vol. 33, 2, 1980, 147–194.
[49]   J. M. Arms, J. E. Marsden, and V. Moncrief, The structure of the space of solutions of
       Einstein’s equations. II. Several Killing fields and the Einstein-Yang-Mills equations, Annals
       Phys. 144 (1982), 81–106.
[50]   R. V. Saraykar and N. E. Joshi, Linearization stability of Einstein equations coupled with
       self-gravitating scalar fields, J. Math. Phys. 22 (1981), 343–347.
[51] A. Higuchi, Quantum linearization instabilities of de Sitter space-time. 1 , Class. Quant. Grav.
     8 (1991), 1961–1981.
[52] A. Higuchi, Quantum linearization instabilities of de Sitter space-time. 2 , Class. Quant. Grav.
     8 (1991), 1983–2004.
[53] B. Losic and W. G. Unruh, On leading order gravitational backreactions in de Sitter spacetime,
     Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006), 023511, [gr-qc/0604122].
[54] C. J. Fewster, D. W. Janssen, L. D. Loveridge, K. Rejzner, and J. Waldron, Quantum reference
     frames, measurement schemes and the type of local algebras in quantum field theory, (2024),
     [2403.11973].
[55]   S. Ali Ahmad, W. Chemissany, M. S. Klinger, and R. G. Leigh, Quantum reference frames
       from top-down crossed products, Phys. Rev. D 110.6 (2024), 065003, [2405.13884].
[56]   C. Goeller, P. A. Höhn, and J. Kirklin, Diffeomorphism-invariant observables and dynamical
       frames in gravity: reconciling bulk locality with general covariance, (2022), [2206.01193].
[57]   S. Carrozza, S. Eccles, and P. A. Höhn, Edge modes as dynamical frames: charges from
       post-selection in generally covariant theories, SciPost Phys. 17.2 (2024), 048, [2205.00913].
[58]   S. Carrozza and P. A. Höhn, Edge modes as reference frames and boundary actions from
       post-selection, JHEP 02 (2022), 172, [2109.06184].
[59]   V. Kabel, A.-C. de la Hamette, L. Apadula, C. Cepollaro, H. Gomes, J. Butterfield, and
       Č. Brukner, Identification is Pointless: Quantum Reference Frames, Localisation of Events,
       and the Quantum Hole Argument, (2024), [2402.10267].
[60]   V. Kabel, Č. Brukner, and W. Wieland, Quantum reference frames at the boundary of
       spacetime, Phys. Rev. D 108.10 (2023), 106022, [2302.11629].
[61] L. Susskind, A Paradox and its Resolution Illustrate Principles of de Sitter Holography, (2023),
     [2304.00589].
[62] Y. Aharonov and L. Susskind, Charge Superselection Rule, Phys. Rev. 155 (1967), 1428–1431.
[63]   Y. Aharonov and T. Kaufherr, Quantum frames of reference, Phys. Rev. D 30 (1984), 368.
[64]   R. M. Angelo, N. Brunner, S. Popescu, A. J. Short, and P. Skrzypczyk, Physics within a
       Quantum Reference Frame, en, J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 44.14 (2011), 145304, issn: 1751-8121.
[65]   F. Giacomini, E. Castro-Ruiz, and Č. Brukner, Quantum mechanics and the covariance of
       physical laws in quantum reference frames, Nature Commun. 10.1 (2019), 494, [1712.07207].
[66]   A.-C. de la Hamette, T. D. Galley, P. A. Höhn, L. Loveridge, and M. P. Müller,
       Perspective-neutral approach to quantum frame covariance for general symmetry groups, (2021),
       [2110.13824].
[67]   P. A. Höhn, I. Kotecha, and F. M. Mele, Quantum Frame Relativity of Subsystems,
       Correlations and Thermodynamics, (2023), [2308.09131].


                                                  98
[68] P. A. Höhn, A. R. H. Smith, and M. P. E. Lock, Trinity of relational quantum dynamics, Phys.
     Rev. D 104.6 (2021), 066001, [1912.00033].
[69]   P. A. Höhn, A. R. H. Smith, and M. P. E. Lock, Equivalence of Approaches to Relational
       Quantum Dynamics in Relativistic Settings, Front. in Phys. 9 (2021), 181, [2007.00580].
[70] L. Chataignier, P. A. Höhn, M. P. E. Lock, and F. M. Mele, Relational Dynamics with Periodic
     Clocks, (2024), [2409.06479].
[71]   S. Ali Ahmad, T. D. Galley, P. A. Höhn, M. P. E. Lock, and A. R. H. Smith, Quantum
       Relativity of Subsystems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128.17 (2022), 170401, [2103.01232].
[72]   P. A. Höhn, M. Krumm, and M. P. Müller, Internal quantum reference frames for finite
       Abelian groups, J. Math. Phys. 63.11 (2022), 112207, [2107.07545].
[73]   A.-C. de la Hamette, S. L. Ludescher, and M. P. Müller, Entanglement-Asymmetry
       Correspondence for Internal Quantum Reference Frames, Phys. Rev. Lett. 129.26 (2022),
       260404, [2112.00046].
[74]   A. Vanrietvelde, P. A. Höhn, F. Giacomini, and E. Castro-Ruiz, A change of perspective:
       switching quantum reference frames via a perspective-neutral framework, Quantum 4 (2020),
       225, [1809.00556].
[75]   A. Vanrietvelde, P. A. Höhn, and F. Giacomini, Switching quantum reference frames in the
       N-body problem and the absence of global relational perspectives, Quantum 7 (2023), 1088,
       [1809.05093].
[76]   F. Giacomini, Spacetime Quantum Reference Frames and superpositions of proper times,
       Quantum 5 (2021), 508, [2101.11628].
[77] E. Castro-Ruiz, F. Giacomini, A. Belenchia, and Č. Brukner, Quantum clocks and the temporal
     localisability of events in the presence of gravitating quantum systems, Nature Commun. 11.1
     (2020), 2672, [1908.10165].
[78]   M. Suleymanov, I. L. Paiva, and E. Cohen, Nonrelativistic spatiotemporal quantum reference
       frames, Phys. Rev. A 109.3 (2024), 032205, [2307.01874].
[79]   S. Carrozza, A. Chatwin-Davies, P. A. Höhn, and F. M. Mele, A correspondence between
       quantum error correcting codes and quantum reference frames, (2024), [2412.15317].
[80]   M. Krumm, P. A. Höhn, and M. P. Müller, Quantum reference frame transformations as
       symmetries and the paradox of the third particle, Quantum 5 (2021), 530, [2011.01951].
[81] A.-C. de la Hamette and T. D. Galley, Quantum reference frames for general symmetry groups,
     Quantum 4 (2020), 367, [2004.14292].
[82]   T. Carette, J. Głowacki, and L. Loveridge, Operational Quantum Reference Frame
       Transformations, (2023), [2303.14002].
[83]   L. Loveridge and T. Miyadera, Relative Quantum Time, Found. Phys. 49.6 (2019), 549–560,
       [1905.08078].
[84]   L. Loveridge, T. Miyadera, and P. Busch, Symmetry, Reference Frames, and Relational
       Quantities in Quantum Mechanics, en, Found. Phys. 48.2 (2018), 135–198, issn: 1572-9516.
[85]   S. D. Bartlett, T. Rudolph, and R. W. Spekkens, Reference frames, superselection rules, and
       quantum information, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79 (2007), 555–609, [quant-ph/0610030].
[86]   E. Castro-Ruiz and O. Oreshkov, Relative subsystems and quantum reference frame
       transformations, (2021), [2110.13199].
[87] D. N. Page and W. K. Wootters, Evolution without evolution: dynamics described by stationary
     observables, Phys. Rev. D 27 (1983), 2885.



                                                99
 [88]   W. K. Wootters, “Time” replaced by quantum correlations, International Journal of
        Theoretical Physics 23.8 (1984), 701–711.
 [89]   M. Kaplan, D. Marolf, X. Yu, and Y. Zhao, De Sitter quantum gravity and the emergence of
        local algebras, (2024), [2410.00111].
 [90]   C.-H. Chen and G. Penington, A clock is just a way to tell the time: gravitational algebras in
        cosmological spacetimes, (2024), [2406.02116].
 [91]   W. Donnelly and L. Freidel, Local subsystems in gauge theory and gravity, Journal of High
        Energy Physics 2016.9 (2016), issn: 1029-8479.
 [92] A. J. Speranza, Local phase space and edge modes for diffeomorphism-invariant theories, JHEP
      02 (2018), 021, [1706.05061].
 [93] L. Freidel, M. Geiller, and D. Pranzetti, Edge modes of gravity. Part I. Corner potentials and
      charges, JHEP 11 (2020), 026, [2006.12527].
 [94]   L. Freidel, M. Geiller, and D. Pranzetti, Edge modes of gravity. Part II. Corner metric and
        Lorentz charges, JHEP 11 (2020), 027, [2007.03563].
 [95] G. Araujo-Regado, P. A. Höhn, F. Sartini, and B. Tomova, Soft edges: the many links between
      soft and edge modes, (2024), [2412.14548].
 [96]   G. Franzmann, To be or not to be, but where?, (2024), [2405.21031].
 [97]   D. Marolf, D. Minic, and S. F. Ross, Notes on space-time thermodynamics and the observer
        dependence of entropy, Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004), 064006, [hep-th/0310022].
 [98] X.-X. Ju, W.-B. Pan, Y.-W. Sun, and Y.-T. Wang, Generalized Rindler Wedge and Holographic
      Observer Concordance, (2023), [2302.03340].
 [99]   X.-X. Ju, B.-H. Liu, W.-B. Pan, Y.-W. Sun, and Y.-T. Wang, Squashed Entanglement from
        Generalized Rindler Wedge, (2023), [2310.09799].
[100]   D. Giulini and D. Marolf, A Uniqueness theorem for constraint quantization, Class. Quant.
        Grav. 16 (1999), 2489–2505, [gr-qc/9902045].
[101]   D. Giulini and D. Marolf, On the generality of refined algebraic quantization, Class. Quant.
        Grav. 16 (1999), 2479–2488, [gr-qc/9812024].
[102]   N. P. Landsman, Rieffel induction as generalized quantum Marsden-Weinstein reduction,
        (1993), [hep-th/9305088].
[103]   A. Higuchi, Quantum linearization instabilities of de Sitter spacetime. II , Classical and
        Quantum Gravity 8.11 (1991), 1983.
[104]   D. Marolf, Group averaging and refined algebraic quantization: Where are we now?, in: 9th
        Marcel Grossmann Meeting on Recent Developments in Theoretical and Experimental General
        Relativity, Gravitation and Relativistic Field Theories (MG 9), 2000, [gr-qc/0011112].
[105] D. K. Kolchmeyer, von Neumann algebras in JT gravity, JHEP 06 (2023), 067, [2303.04701].
[106] D. K. Kolchmeyer and H. Liu, Chaos and the Emergence of the Cosmological Horizon, (2024),
      [2411.08090].
[107]   W. Pauli, Handbuch der Physik 5, 1 , 1958.
[108]   W. G. Unruh and R. M. Wald, Time and the Interpretation of Canonical Quantum Gravity,
        Phys. Rev. D 40 (1989), 2598.
[109]   A. S. Holevo, Probabilistic and Statistical Aspects of Quantum Theory, vol. 1, Statistics and
        Probability, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1982.
[110] P. Busch, M. Grabowski, and P. J. Lahti, Operational Quantum Physics, vol. 31, Lecture Notes
      in Physics Monographs, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1995.



                                                   100
[111]   S. L. Braunstein, C. M. Caves, and G. J. Milburn, Generalized uncertainty relations: Theory,
        examples, and Lorentz invariance, Annals Phys. 247 (1996), 135, [quant-ph/9507004].
[112] A. R. H. Smith and M. Ahmadi, Quantizing time: Interacting clocks and systems, Quantum 3
      (2019), 160, issn: 2521-327X.
[113]   R. Brunetti, K. Fredenhagen, and M. Hoge, Time in quantum physics: From an external
        parameter to an intrinsic observable, Found. Phys. 40 (2010), 1368–1378, [0909.1899].
[114]   P. A. Höhn, E. Kubalova, and A. Tsobanjan, Effective relational dynamics of a nonintegrable
        cosmological model, Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012), 065014, [1111.5193].
[115]   P. A. Höhn, A. Russo, and A. R. H. Smith, Matter relative to quantum hypersurfaces, Phys.
        Rev. D 109.10 (2024), 105011, [2308.12912].
[116]   K. V. Kuchař, Time and interpretations of quantum gravity, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 20 (2011),
        3–86.
[117]   C. J. Isham, Canonical quantum gravity and the problem of time, NATO Sci. Ser. C 409
        (1993), ed. by L. A. Ibort and M. A. Rodriguez, 157–287, [gr-qc/9210011].
[118]   E. Anderson, The Problem of Time, vol. 190, Fundamental Theories of Physics, Springer
        International Publishing, 2017.
[119]   B. Dittrich, Partial and complete observables for Hamiltonian constrained systems, Gen. Rel.
        Grav. 39 (2007), 1891–1927, [gr-qc/0411013].
[120]   L. Chataignier, Construction of quantum Dirac observables and the emergence of WKB time,
        Phys. Rev. D 101.8 (2020), 086001, [1910.02998].
[121]   L. Chataignier, Relational observables, reference frames, and conditional probabilities, Phys.
        Rev. D 103.2 (2021), 026013, [2006.05526].
[122]   D. Marolf, Quantum observables and recollapsing dynamics, Class. Quant. Grav. 12 (1995),
        1199–1220, [gr-qc/9404053].
[123]   D. Marolf, Observables and a Hilbert space for Bianchi IX , Class. Quant. Grav. 12 (1995),
        1441–1454, [gr-qc/9409049].
[124]   P. A. Höhn and A. Vanrietvelde, How to switch between relational quantum clocks, New J.
        Phys. 22.12 (2020), 123048, [1810.04153].
[125] Y. Aharonov and L. Susskind, Observability of the Sign Change of Spinors under 2pi Rotations,
      Phys. Rev. 158 (1967), 1237–1238.
[126] P. A. M. Dirac, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Belfer Graduate School of Sciencem Yeshiva
      University, New York, 1964.
[127]   M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, Quantization of Gauge Systems, Princeton: Princeton
        University Press, 1992.
[128] D. Marolf and I. A. Morrison, Group Averaging for de Sitter free fields, Class. Quant. Grav. 26
      (2009), 235003, [0810.5163].
[129] J. Held and H. Maxfield, The Hilbert space of de Sitter JT: a case study for canonical methods
      in quantum gravity, (2024), [2410.14824].
[130] C. E. Dolby, The Conditional probability interpretation of the Hamiltonian constraint, (2004),
      [gr-qc/0406034].
[131]   R. Gambini, R. A. Porto, J. Pullin, and S. Torterolo, Conditional probabilities with Dirac
        observables and the problem of time in quantum gravity, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009), 041501.
[132]   V. Giovannetti, S. Lloyd, and L. Maccone, Quantum Time, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2015), 945933.
[133] E. Moreva, G. Brida, M. Gramegna, V. Giovannetti, L. Maccone, and M. Genovese, Time from
      quantum entanglement: an experimental illustration, Phys. Rev. A 89.5 (2014), 052122.

                                                  101
[134] A. R. H. Smith and M. Ahmadi, Quantum clocks observe classical and quantum time dilation,
      Nature Commun. 11.1 (2020), 5360, [1904.12390].
[135]   L. Hausmann, A. Schmidhuber, and E. Castro-Ruiz, Measurement events relative to temporal
        quantum reference frames, (2023), [2308.10967].
[136]   P. A. Höhn, Switching Internal Times and a New Perspective on the ‘Wave Function of the
        Universe’, Universe 5.5 (2019), 116, [1811.00611].
[137]   J. Lurie, Lecture notes on von Neumann algebras (Math 261y),
        https://www.math.ias.edu/~lurie/261y.html, Harvard University, 2011.
[138]   C. Kiefer, Quantum Gravity, International Series of Monographs on Physics, OUP Oxford,
        2007, isbn: 9780199212521.
[139]   A. Ashtekar, R. Tate, and C. Uggla, Minisuperspaces: Observables and quantization, Int. J.
        Mod. Phys. D 2 (1993), 15–50, [gr-qc/9302027].
[140]   M. Bojowald, Canonical Gravity and Applications: Cosmology, Black Holes, and Quantum
        Gravity, Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[141] R. Haag, Local quantum physics: Fields, particles, algebras, Springer Science & Business Media,
      2012.
[142] J. J. Bisognano and E. H. Wichmann, On the Duality Condition for a Hermitian Scalar Field,
      J. Math. Phys. 16 (1975), 985–1007.
[143]   G. L. Sewell, Quantum fields on manifolds: PCT and gravitationally induced thermal states,
        Annals Phys. 141 (1982), 201–224.
[144] J. Sorce, Analyticity and the Unruh effect: a study of local modular flow, JHEP 24 (2020), 040,
      [2403.18937].
[145]   W. Donnelly and S. B. Giddings, Diffeomorphism-invariant observables and their nonlocal
        algebra, Phys. Rev. D 93.2 (2016), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 94, 029903 (2016)], 024030,
        [1507.07921].
[146]   W. Donnelly and S. B. Giddings, Observables, gravitational dressing, and obstructions to
        locality and subsystems, Phys. Rev. D 94.10 (2016), 104038, [1607.01025].
[147]   M. B. Fröb, A. Much, and K. Papadopoulos, Noncommutative geometry from perturbative
        quantum gravity, Phys. Rev. D 107.6 (2023), 064041, [2207.03345].
[148]   M. B. Fröb, A. Much, and K. Papadopoulos, Non-commutative coordinates from quantum
        gravity, PoS CORFU2022 (2023), 307, [2303.17238].
[149]   K. Fredenhagen, On the Modular Structure of Local Algebras of Observables, Commun. Math.
        Phys. 97 (1985), 79.
[150]   D. Buchholz, K. Fredenhagen, and C. D’Antoni, The Universal Structure of Local Algebras,
        Commun. Math. Phys. 111 (1987), 123.
[151]   D. Buchholz and R. Verch, Scaling algebras and renormalization group in algebraic quantum
        field theory, Rev. Math. Phys. 7 (1995), 1195–1240, [hep-th/9501063].
[152]   J. Yngvason, The role of type III factors in quantum field theory, Reports on Mathematical
        Physics 55.1 (2005), 135–147, issn: 0034-4877.
[153]   L. F. Abbott and S. Deser, Stability of Gravity with a Cosmological Constant, Nucl. Phys. B
        195 (1982), 76–96.
[154] H. J. Borchers, Über die Vollständigkeit lorentzinvarianter Felder in einer zeitartigen Röhre, Il
      Nuovo Cimento (1955-1965) 19.4 (1961), 787–793, issn: 1827-6121.
[155]   H. Araki, Relative Entropy of States of Von Neumann Algebras, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.
        Kyoto 1976 (1976), 809–833.


                                                 102
[156] A. Strohmaier and E. Witten, Analytic States in Quantum Field Theory on Curved Spacetimes,
      Annales Henri Poincare 25.10 (2024), 4543–4590, [2302.02709].
[157]   A. Strohmaier and E. Witten, The Timelike Tube Theorem in Curved Spacetime, Commun.
        Math. Phys. 405.7 (2024), 153, [2303.16380].
[158]   E. Witten, Algebras, regions, and observers, Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 107 (2024), 247–276,
        [2303.02837].
[159]   A. H. Taub, Approximate Stress Energy Tensor for Gravitational Fields, Journal of
        Mathematical Physics 2.6 (1961), 787–793.
[160]   A. Taub, “Variational principles in general relativity”, in: Relativistic Fluid Dynamics,
        Springer, 2011, pp. 205–300.
[161] J. E. Marsden, Lectures on Geometric Methods in Mathematical Physics, Society for Industrial
      and Applied Mathematics, 1981, eprint: https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611970326.
[162]   J. M. Arms and I. M. Anderson, Perturbations of conservation laws in field theories, Annals
        Phys. 167 (1986), 354–389.
[163] S. Ali Ahmad, M. S. Klinger, and S. Lin, Semifinite von Neumann algebras in gauge theory and
      gravity, (2024), [2407.01695].
[164]   S. Deser and Y. Choquet-Bruhat, On the Stability of Flat Space, Annals Phys. 81 (1973),
        165–178.
[165] Y. Choquet-Bruhat, A. E. Fischer, and J. E. Marsden, “Maximal hypersurfaces and positivity
      of mass”, in: Isolated gravitating systems in general relativity, 1979.
[166]   V. Jones, Lectures on von Neumann algebras, Vanderbilt (2015),
        https://my.vanderbilt.edu/jonesvf/von-neumann-algebras-vanderbilt-2015/.
[167]   H. Araki, A Generalisation Of Borchers’ Theorem, Helvetica Physica Acta (Switzerland)
        (1963).
[168] P. Busch, M. Grabowski, and P. J. Lahti, Time observables in quantum theory, Physics Letters
      A 191.5-6 (1994), 357–361.
[169] W. Donnelly, Decomposition of entanglement entropy in lattice gauge theory, Physical Review
      D 85.8 (2012), issn: 1550-2368.
[170] W. Donnelly and A. C. Wall, Entanglement Entropy of Electromagnetic Edge Modes, Physical
      Review Letters 114.11 (2015), issn: 1079-7114.
[171]   I. I. Shapiro, Fourth Test of General Relativity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (26 1964), 789–791.
[172] L. Chataignier, P. A. Höhn, M. P. E. Lock, and F. M. Mele, Relational Dynamics with Periodic
      Clocks, (2024), [2409.06479].
[173]   M. Takesaki, Theory of Operator Algebras III , Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences,
        Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, isbn: 9783662104545.
[174]   D. Marolf, Solving the Problem of Time in Mini-superspace: Measurement of Dirac
        Observables, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009), 084016, [0902.1551].
[175] B. Dittrich, P. A. Höhn, T. A. Koslowski, and M. I. Nelson, Can chaos be observed in quantum
      gravity?, Phys. Lett. B 769 (2017), 554–560, [1602.03237].




                                                  103
