                                          Gravitational algebras and the generalized second law

                                                                  Thomas Faulkner∗1 and Antony J. Speranza†1
                                              1
arXiv:2405.00847v2 [hep-th] 12 Aug 2024




                                                  Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana IL 61801, USA




                                                                                         May 1, 2024




                                                                                            Abstract



                                                       We derive the generalized second law (GSL) for arbitrary cuts of Killing horizons
                                                   from the perspective of crossed-product gravitational algebras, making use of a recent
                                                   proposal by one of us for the construction of local gravitational algebras. This construc-
                                                   tion relies on the existence of a state whose modular flow is geometric on the horizon.
                                                   In both free and interacting quantum field theories, such states are guaranteed to exist
                                                   by the properties of half-sided translations on the horizon. Using geometric identities
                                                   derived from the canonical analysis of general relativity on null surfaces, we show that
                                                   the crossed product entropy agrees with the generalized entropy of the horizon cut in a
                                                   semiclassical limit, and further reproduce Wall’s result relating the GSL to monotonic-
                                                   ity of relative entropy of the quantum field algebras. We also give a novel generalization
                                                   of the GSL for interacting theories in asymptotically flat spacetimes involving the con-
                                                   cept of an algebra at infinity for a half-sided translation, which accounts for triviality of
                                                   the algebra of fields smeared only on the horizon. Going beyond the semiclassical limit,
                                                   we compute subleading corrections to the crossed product entropy, but are unable to
                                                   determine if the GSL continues to hold after accounting for these. We speculate that an
                                                   improved GSL could follow from a hidden subalgebra structure of the crossed products,
                                                   assuming the existence of an operator-valued weight between horizon cut algebras.




                                          ∗
                                              tomf@illinois.edu
                                          †
                                              asperanz@gmail.com


                                                                                                1
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                 3
  1.1   Summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5


2 Crossed product and modular theory                                                           8


3 Semiclassical generalized second law                                                        11
  3.1   Half-sided modular inclusions for horizon cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      12
  3.2   Geometric horizon identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
  3.3   Generalized second law for semiclassical states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     23


4 Algebra at infinity                                                                         28
  4.1   Semiclassical GSL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
  4.2   Gravitational algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36
  4.3   Rotating black holes and Unruh states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       43


5 Perturbative corrections to crossed product entropy                                         45


6 Monotonicity from crossed product subalgebras                                               52


7 Discussion                                                                                  58


A Tomita operators for crossed product algebra                                                63


B Null surfaces                                                                               67
  B.1 Null surface geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     67
  B.2 Gaussian null coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       68
  B.3 Quasi-Killing vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     69


C Canonical formalism and gravitational charges                                               70

                                               2
1    Introduction
Generalized entropy is a fundamental quantity in semiclassical quantum gravity providing
a link between dynamical geometry, thermodynamics, and entanglement. It originally ap-
peared in the context of black hole thermodynamics, where Bekenstein recognized that one
could violate the second law of thermodynamics by depositing entropy into a black hole
unless the black hole possessed an intrinsic entropy proportional to its horizon area [1, 2].
The resulting generalized entropy consists of a sum
                                                A
                                     Sgen =        + Sout ,                                 (1.1)
                                              4ℏGN
with the Bekenstein-Hawking area term representing the intrinsic black hole entropy, and
Sout denoting the matter entropy outside of the black hole. The generalized second law is
then the statement that Sgen cannot decrease under time evolution, despite the fact that the
matter entropy Sout may decrease as matter falls across the horizon.
    The connection to entanglement comes from interpreting Sout as the fine-grained entan-
glement entropy of quantum fields restricted to the black hole exterior [3–6]. Not only does
this give a concrete definition of Sout , it also leads to a UV-finite notion of entropy in quan-
tum gravity, owing to an argument of Susskind and Uglum [7] that the divergences in the
quantum field entanglement entropy cancel against the renormalization of GN in Sgen . This
cancellation of divergences has been verified in a numerous examples [8–12], and ultimately
motivates interpreting Sgen as a true count of the microscopic quantum gravitational degrees
of freedom of the black hole.
    Since entanglement entropy can be associated with generic causally complete subregions
in quantum field theory, it is natural to consider generalized entropy for arbitrary subre-
gions in semiclassical quantum gravity [12–14]. In this more general context, the area of
the codimension-2 boundary of a Cauchy surface for the subregion takes the place of the
horizon area in the Bekenstein-Hawking term in Sgen . By viewing the generalized entropy as
the quantum analog of the area in semiclassical gravity, one may upgrade various classical
theorems in general relativity to quantum versions. Bekenstein’s generalized second law is
one such example, being the quantum version of Hawking’s classical area theorem [15, 16].
The quantum focusing conjecture as a semiclassical version of the classical focusing theorem
is another prominent example [12], which has far-reaching applications including quantum
entropy bounds (see [17] for a review) and field theoretic inequalities such as the quantum
null energy condition [18–20]. Generalized entropy also features in holographic entanglement
entropy, where the Ryu-Takayanagi and quantum extremal surface formulas relate the gen-
eralized entropy of entanglement wedges in the bulk to entanglement entropies of subregions
in the boundary CFT dual [21–26].
    One obstruction to obtaining rigorous proofs of semiclassical entropy relations such as the
quantum focusing conjecture is the occurrence of UV divergences in entanglement entropies
in quantum field theory. These can be eliminated by employing regulators and constructing
renormalized entropies, but this procedure can often obscure important quantum information
theoretic relations such as strong subadditivity. On the other hand, the expected UV-

                                                3
finiteness of the generalized entropy suggests that coupling the theory to gravity results in a
universal renormalized notion of entropy in semiclassical quantum gravity. If this is the case,
there ought to be a continuum description of this renormalized entropy that is manifestly
regulator-independent.
    Recent progress in this direction comes from considerations of von Neumann algebras
in quantum gravity. These began with the work of Leutheusseur and Liu [27, 28], who
considered the strict large N limit of a holographic CFT above the Hawking-Page transition,
and found an emergent type III1 von Neumann algebra, which they took to be a signature
of the emergence of a black hole horizon in the bulk dual. Subsequently, Witten argued
that N1 corrections implement a crossed product on the algebra, resulting in a type II∞ von
Neumann algebra, which notably possesses a well-defined notion of renormalized entropy [29].
This entropy agrees with the generalized entropy of the horizon in semiclassical states of the
algebra up to an overall constant, which can be interpreted as a universal large background
value of the entropy [30]. The agreement between algebraic entropy and generalized entropy
is closely tied to the implementation of the gravitational constraints, and therefore holds
directly in the semiclassical bulk description. This allows for the construction of type II
algebras and associated entropies in configurations with no currently known holographic dual
description, such as the static patch of de Sitter, or general black holes in asymptotically
flat space [31, 32].
    The bulk semiclassical gravity picture further suggests that generic subregions give rise to
type II gravitational algebras with a well-defined renormalized entropy [33]. These algebras
each contain a type III1 subalgebra describing quantum fields within the subregion in a fixed
background geometry, as one expects from from the GN → 0 limit, which suppresses gravita-
tional backreaction. The emergence of such type III1 subregion algebras in the large N limit
of holography has been explored in a number of recent works [34–37]. The local gravitational
algebras also contain additional operators representing the asymptotic ADM energy or the
energy of a localized observer degree of freedom, which serve as anchors to dress the local
operators in the gravitational descriptions. Imposing the gravitational constraints on both
sets of operators results in a type II crossed product algebra that describes the fields and
semiclassical geometry of the subregion. As in the case of Killing horizons, the renormalized
entropy computed for semiclassical states in this algebra agrees with the generalized entropy
up to a state-independent constant. Hence, crossed product algebras are a viable framework
for a continuum, regulator-independent description of semiclassical geometry and entropies.
    Since crossed-product gravitational algebras have manifestly UV-finite renormalized en-
tropies, they potentially could provide a new set of tools for analyzing semiclassical entropy
relations such as the quantum focusing conjecture [12]. The goal of the present work is to
initiate such investigations in a more restricted context by revisiting the generalized second
law (GSL) for Killing horizons. In addition to their global boost symmetry, Killing horizons
possess an enhanced near-horizon symmetry that enables a detailed analysis of the vacuum
entanglement properties of quantum fields in the spacetime containing the horizon. Due to
this symmetry, one can obtain an explicit expression for the vacuum modular Hamiltonian
of any subregion whose entangling surface lives on an arbitrary cut of the horizon [38–40].
These subregions therefore provide nontrivial examples of the geometric modular flow con-


                                               4
jecture that is necessary in the construction of gravitational algebras for arbitrary subregions
proposed by Jensen, Sorce, and Speranza (JSS) [33]. Hence, a second motivation for inves-
tigating the GSL is to verify the general construction proposed by JSS in situations where
the modular Hamiltonian is not determined by global spacetime symmetries.
    Wall gave a proof of the GSL for rapidly evolving perturbed Killing horizons by relating
the generalized entropy of cuts of the horizon to the relative entropy of quantum fields in the
region defined by the cut [38]. After this, the GSL becomes equivalent to the monotonicity of
relative entropy under algebra inclusions. The first result of the present paper is to reproduce
this proof using crossed product gravitational algebras. The entropy of certain semiclassical
states for the gravitational algebra manifestly takes the form of a relative entropy for the
quantum fields, up to a correction involving the asymptotic gravitational charge. Hence, by
performing the crossed product separately at two different cuts of a horizon, we immediately
conclude in section 3.3 a monotonicity result for the entropies of these states, thereby showing
that crossed product algebras can reproduce Wall’s proof of the generalized second law.
    This raises the question of whether crossed product entropies can lead to stronger mono-
tonicity results beyond the strict semiclassical limit for the quantum state. The entropy
formula for type II gravitational algebras receives corrections to the semiclassical expres-
sion due to entanglement between the asymptotic gravitational charges and quantum field
degrees of freedom. One can ask whether the crossed product entropy continues to satisfy
monotonicity after these corrections are included. We explore this question by computing
the corrections to the semiclassical entropy formula in section 5. We demonstrate a num-
ber of properties of these corrections including explicit bounds on their size, but are unable
to determine if the crossed product entropy satisfies a monotonicity result after accounting
for these corrections. We also explore the possibility in section 6 that the crossed product
algebras could exhibit a subalgebra structure that is obscured in their standard presenta-
tion. This would follow from the existence of an operator-valued weight between horizon cut
algebras, and assuming its existence, we derive a modified monotonicity result for crossed
product entropies.
    The overall picture that emerges from these investigations is that crossed products for
subregions indeed capture a useful notion of gravitational entropy, and they provide powerful
tools for investigating entropy in semiclassical quantum gravity. They raise the possibility
of finding strengthened data-processing inequalities associated with the change in relative
entropy between horizon cuts, or otherwise characterizing temporary violations of the second
law by gravitational effects. Ultimately, they could lead to a better understanding entropy
inequalities such as the quantum focusing conjecture, consequences of causality in quantum
field theory, and low energy constraints on quantum theories of gravity.


1.1    Summary of results

This paper contains a number of new results concerning crossed product algebras and semi-
classical generalized entropy which we briefly summarize here.
   Section 2 reviews the definition of the modular crossed product algebra, and goes over

                                               5
the modular theory for the classical-quantum states that are used in the remainder of the
paper. We present novel expressions for the Tomita operators for these states, the details of
which are given in appendix A, which lead to a simplified derivation of the density matrices
for these states originally obtained in [33]. This also produces expressions for the modular
conjugations for these states which have not appeared previously.
    We then turn to the discussion of gravitational algebras and the GSL for Killing horizons
in section 3. We begin in section 3.1 reviewing the argument for the form of the vacuum
modular Hamiltonian for arbitrary cuts of a Killing horizon. Versions of this argument have
appeared in various forms across several works [38–40], and this section serves as a summary
that presents the derivation in a unified manner. We emphasize the connection between the
form of this modular Hamiltonian and properties of half-sided translations and half-sided
modular inclusions, introduced respectively by Borchers and Wiesbrock [41–43]. Focusing
on half-sided translations leads to a derivation of the modular Hamiltonian that holds even
in interacting field theories, which specifically does not rely on the existence of bounded
operators localized strictly on the black hole horizon.
    Following this, we present in section 3.2 various geometric identities associated with the
gravitational constraint equations on the black hole horizon. These identities are derived
using the canonical analysis of general relativity on null surfaces, the details of which are
given in appendix C. This leads to the identification of the global gravitational constraint
(3.35) that relates the asymptotic gravitational charges to the bulk generator of modular flow,
and which is responsible for producing the crossed product when imposed on the algebra
of quantum fields and asymptotic charges. We also note that a semilocal gravitational
constraint leads to a geometric identity (3.32) which relates the area of a horizon cut to the
one-sided modular Hamiltonian and the late-time area. This identity was originally derived
by Wall by directly integrating the Raychaudhuri equation [38]; our derivation instead shows
how it arises from the canonical analysis, which directly ties the identity to the underlying
diffeomorphism invariance of the gravitational theory. This has the added advantage of
transparently identifying the gravitational contribution to the average null energy on the
horizon, which in the GN → 0 limit reduces to the square of the perturbative horizon shear,
equation (3.41). This identity also corresponds to the local Smarr relation discussed by
JSS [33], specialized to the present case of a subregion bounded by a cut of a Killing horizon.
    We then turn to the construction of gravitational algebras and analysis of the GSL in
section 3.3. We show that the gravitational algebra resulting from imposing the global
constraint on the horizon cut algebras takes the form of a modular crossed product, using
the form of the vacuum modular Hamiltonian derived in section 3.1. We can then directly
compute the entropy of classical-quantum states on these algebras, and show using the semi-
classical expansion of this entropy (2.14) that the GSL reduces to monotonicity of relative
entropy for the underlying quantum field theory algebra inclusion. This resulting GSL relies
on choosing an appropriate normalization for the traces defined on the gravitational alge-
bras for different cuts, which in general is not canonically determined. We resolve this by
requiring that the trace agree on functions of the asymptotic charge q̂, which is contained in
all horizon cut algebras. This implies that we can use the same formula for the trace, (2.9),
for any horizon cut, and it is important that the same quantum field vacuum state |Ω⟩ can


                                              6
be used in this formula for different horizon cuts.
    To simplify the discussion, the analysis of section 3 was restricted to AdS black holes, for
which the horizon provides a complete Cauchy surface. Section 4 generalizes the arguments
to spacetimes with other asymptotics, such as asymptotically flat or de Sitter black holes.
For free fields, this generalization simply consists of tensoring in an additional factor to the
algebra associated with fields that pass through I + or the cosmological horizon. However,
this description fails for interacting theories, since there is no algebra consisting of fields
strictly localized to codimension-1 black hole horizon, and hence naively there is no algebra
with which to take the tensor product. In section 4.1, we show that one can handle the case of
interacting theories using the concept of an algebra at infinity for the half-sided translation.
This leads to a natural definition of a subalgebra associated with fields that never enter
the black hole, but with a trivial relative commutant, corresponding to triviality of the
horizon algebra. This captures the notion that any operator with finite fluctuations must be
smeared in a region near the horizon, and cannot be strictly localized to the horizon. Using
the existence of a conditional expectation to this algebra at infinity, we show that one again
recovers the semiclassical GSL, generalizing the argument of Wall that used the existence of
tensor-factorized states [38].
    Having established the structure of this algebra at infinity, we describe in section 4.2
the construction of the gravitational algebra. Adapting the arguments of Kudler-Flam,
Leutheusser, and Satishchandran (KFLS) [32], we show that the gravitational constraints
can separately be imposed on the algebra at infinity and on the horizon. Once this is done,
there is a final matching constraint associated with the junction where these null surfaces
meet on the Penrose diagram. This condition takes the form of a constraint, equation
(4.12), matching the two time variables arising in the separate crossed products for each
horizon. Along with the matching conditions for the asymptotic charges, this eliminates
the asymptotic horizon area in favor of the asymptotic ADM mass as the extra gravitational
charge in the algebra. We discuss conditions for which the final algebra remains semifinite and
possesses a trace, and show that these are satisfied in the example of the Schwarzschild black
hole in the Hartle-Hawking vacuum. Owing to the existence of the conditional expectation
to the algebra at infinity, we are able to conclude that the crossed product algebras satisfy a
global second law (4.35) which generalizes a similar result obtained in [30], and holds for all
states, without any semiclassical assumption. We also note that the matching constraint can
be used to eliminate the observer in the discussion of the algebra for the Schwarzschild-de
Sitter black hole considered by KFLS [32]. In section 4.3, we point out some subtleties that
may arise in obtaining a semifinite algebra at infinity when working with asymptotically flat
rotating black holes or black holes formed from collapse.
    The versions of the GSL obtained in sections 3.3 and 4.2 rely on the semiclassical ap-
proximation of the quantum states. This naturally leads to the question of whether crossed
product algebras satisfy a GSL beyond the semiclassical limit. To begin addressing this ques-
tion, we compute in section 5 the subleading corrections to the semiclassical entropy formula
(2.14). Noting that the classical-quantum state |Φ, f ⟩ can be viewed as the image under
a Petz-recovery channel from the quantum field theory state |Φ⟩ to a state on the crossed
product, we show that monotonicity of relative entropy for this channel implies that the


                                               7
corrections to the semiclassical crossed product entropy are strictly nonnegative. We then
obtain an explicit expression for this correction, given by equation (5.23). We can directly
evaluate the first nontrivial contribution to this correction in the semiclassical expansion,
which we find is second order in the expansion parameter, and we verify that this correc-
tion is positive. Unfortunately, we are unable to determine if the crossed product entropy,
including these corrections, satisfies a monotonicity result, but note that if one existed, it
would imply an improved data-processing inequality (5.32).
    Finally, in section 6, we explore the possibility that the crossed-product GSL could follow
from a hidden subalgebra structure for the gravitational algebras. We show that if there is an
operator-valued weight [44,45] between the horizon cut quantum field theory algebras, there
is a canonical way to realize the later horizon-cut gravitational algebra as a subalgebra of the
earlier gravitational algebra. Although we do not at present have a proof for the existence
of this operator-valued weight, we conjecture one should exist by analogy with the case of a
split inclusions, for which the operator-valued weight is guaranteed. Assuming its existence,
the result crossed product subalgebra structure should imply a version of the GSL stemming
from monotonicity of relative entropy for this algebra inclusion. In order to leverage this,
we consider a free energy quantity (6.15) defined as a relative entropy between the state of
interest and the dual weight that naturally arises in the crossed product construction. This
leads to the monotonicity results (6.17) and (6.22), which are nontrivial, but not quite the
GSL we were seeking. However, we note that in the semiclassical limit, these inequalities
reduce to the GSL, and we leave open the possibility that they may lead to the desired result
with a more careful analysis.
   We conclude in section 7 by outlining some questions raised by the present work, and
describing ideas for future applications to problems in semiclassical quantum gravity.


Note added: During the final stages of writing this paper, [46] appeared which contains
some overlap with the results presented here.



2    Crossed product and modular theory
We begin with a brief overview of the crossed product construction in semiclassical gravity,
before describing the application of this construction to black hole horizons in section 3.
    Several recent investigations into semiclassical quantum gravity have noted the relevance
of crossed products in the algebraic formulation of the theory [29–33]. The GN → 0 limit
of quantum gravity admits a description in terms of quantum field theory in curved space-
time, in which local field algebras are assigned to arbitrary causally complete subregions.
These algebras are generically von Neumann√algebra factors of type III1 , and this structure
is expected to persist to all orders in the GN expansion [27–29]. However, there exist
certain nonlocal observables such as the global ADM Hamiltonian that interact nontrivially
with these local algebras when going beyond the strict GN → 0 limit. In particular, the
gauge constraints arising from diffeomorphism invariance yield relations between the nonlo-

                                               8
cal observables and local algebras which affect the structure of the algebras even at GN = 0.
Crossed product algebras are the result of imposing the constraints on the combined system
of local algebras and global observables.
    The construction of gravitational crossed product algebras begins with the algebra AQFT
of quantum fields restricted to a causally complete subregion R in spacetime. The subregions
of interest in the present work are the exterior of a bifurcation surface of an eternal black hole,
or more generally the exterior of a cut of the future horizon. AQFT acts on a Hilbert space
HQFT , and we take it to be a factor of type III1 in accord with arguments for the universal
type of subregion algebras in quantum field theory [47–49]. The additional nonlocal degree
of freedom is an asymptotic gravitational charge, which will generally be proportional to the
perturbation of late-time area of a black hole horizon when working with Killing horizons, and
can be related to other asymptotic charges such as the ADM Hamiltonian of the spacetime.
We represent this asymptotic charge as minus the position operator acting on the Hilbert
space Hasy = L2 (R), which reflects the semiclassical assumption that the spectrum of q̂ is
assumed to be continuous and unbounded above and below. The crossed product algebra
Ab is the subalgebra of AQFT ⊗ B(Hasy ) that commutes with the complementary asymptotic
charge associated, for example, with the left asymptotic area of a two-sided black hole. On
the Hilbert space H b = HQFT ⊗Hasy , this left asymptotic charge is represented by the operator

                                            q̂L = q̂ + hΩ ,                                  (2.1)
where hΩ = − log ∆Ω is the modular Hamiltonian of a specific vacuum state |Ω⟩ ∈ HQFT .
The interpretation of q̂L as a left asymptotic charge follows from a diffeomorphism constraint
in semiclassical quantum gravity, and additionally relies on the modular flow generated by
hΩ agreeing with the diffeomorphism flow along a vector ξ a on a Cauchy surface for the
subregion R. As we review in section 3.1, vacuum states of the horizon average null energy
operators satisfy this property for algebras associated to cuts of the Killing horizon. We will
refer to |Ω⟩ as the vacuum state for the QFT algebra since it is a vacuum for the average
null energy operators, although it may not coincide with a global minimal energy state.
   Ab can be expressed as
                             Ab = eip̂hΩ ae−ip̂hΩ , q̂ ,      a ∈ AQFT ,                     (2.2)
where the notation ⟨·⟩ means the von Neumann algebra generated by the displayed operators
by taking a double commutant. The commutant algebra Ab′ naturally describes operators
in the causal complement R′ dressed to the left asymptotic charge q̂L . It consists of the
operators
                             Ab′ = ⟨a′ , q̂ + hΩ ⟩ , a′ ∈ A′QFT .                    (2.3)

    We are interested in characterizing entropies of states on the algebra Ab and relating them
to generalized entropies for the Killing horizon. The specific states we will focus on are the
classical-quantum states |Φ⟩
                           b = |Φ, f ⟩ := |Φ⟩QFT ⊗ f (q). The density matrix for this state
can be computed by first determining the Tomita operator SΦb , defined as the unbounded,
antilinear operator which acts on states of the form b a|Φ⟩,
                                                         b b a ∈ Ab as
                                              a|Φ⟩
                                          SΦb b    a† |Φ⟩
                                                b =b   b                                     (2.4)

                                                   9
                                                                     a = eip̂hΩ ae−ip̂hΩ eiuq̂ (see
By solving this relation for a spanning set of operators of the form b
appendix A), one finds that

                                     SΦb = JΦ|Ω e−ip̂hΩ bsΦb bs′Φb                                                (2.5)
                                                      1                       q̂
                                     bsΦb = eip̂hΩ ∆Φ|Ω f ∗ (q̂ − hΩ )e e−ip̂hΩ
                                                      2                       2                                   (2.6)
                                                    1                  1
                                     bs′Φb = q̂              JΩ JΩ|Φ ∆Ω|Φ
                                                                       2
                                                                                                                  (2.7)
                                            e f (q̂ + hΩ )
                                              2



where bsΦb is a linear operator affiliated with Ab and bs′Φb with Ab′ .

    In the special case of a vacuum classical-quantum state |Ω⟩ b = |Ω, f ⟩ with real wavefunc-
       ∗
tion f (q̂) = f (q̂), the expression simplifies dramatically such that the polar decomposition
           1
SΩb = JΩb ∆Ωb2 becomes manifest, with

                                                                             e−q̂ ∆Ω
                                                                                        
                        −ip̂hΩ
                                         ∆Ωb = |f (q̂)|2 eq̂ ·                             = ρΩb · (ρ′Ωb )−1 .
                                                           
               JΩb = JΩ e        ,                                                                                (2.8)
                                                                         |f (q̂ + hΩ )|2

The density matrix ρΩb is an operator affiliated with A,
                                                      b and can be used to define a trace on
the algebra according to [29]
                                            −1
                               a) = ⟨Ω, f |ρΩ
                            Tr(b            b ba|Ω, f ⟩ = 2π⟨Ω, 0p |e−q̂ b
                                                                         a|Ω, 0p ⟩,                               (2.9)

where |0p ⟩ is the δ-function normalized zero p̂ eigenstate. Note that the density matrix used
to define this trace depends only on the operator q̂, and not on the modular operator ∆Ω .
This will be important in section 3.3 when comparing traces for crossed product algebras
associated with different subregions. These algebras do not obviously form subalgebras for
nested subregions since the modular Hamiltonian hΩ depends on the choice of subregion.
However, all the algebras share the operator q̂, and the density matrix ρΩb remains the same
in each algebra, leading to a standard choice for its normalization and the normalization of
the trace in different crossed product algebras.
    Returning to the more general classical-quantum state |Φ⟩,   b we obtain the density matrix
                                 †
for Ab from the relation ρΦb = bsΦbbsΦb . This reproduces the expression derived in [33],

                              ρΦb = eip̂hΩ f (q̂ − hΩ )eq̂ ∆Φ|Ω f ∗ (q̂ − hΩ )e−ip̂hΩ .                          (2.10)

For computations of the entropy, it is convenient to rewrite this density matrix as
                                          q̂         −1              −1            q̂
                            ρΦb = f (q̂)e 2 eip̂hΩ ∆Ω 2 ∆Φ|Ω ∆Ω 2 e−ip̂hΩ e 2 f ∗ (q̂)
                                          q̂              −1         −1                  q̂
                                = f (q̂)e 2 eip̂hΩ|Φ ∆Ω|Φ
                                                        2
                                                          ∆Φ ∆Ω|Φ
                                                                2
                                                                  e−ip̂hΩ|Φ e 2 f ∗ (q̂)
                                = eip̂hΩ|Φ f (q̂ − hΩ|Φ )eq̂ ∆Φ f ∗ (q̂ − hΩ|Φ )e−ip̂hΩ|Φ                        (2.11)

                                                                                        −1    1
                                                                                                     −1     1
where in the second line we have used the cocycle relations ∆Ω 2 ∆Φ|Ω
                                                                    2
                                                                       = ∆Ω|Φ2
                                                                               ∆Φ2 and the fact
that these operators are affiliated with AQFT , as well as the fact that hΩ and hΩ|Φ generate

                                                               10
the same action on operators in AQFT (see e.g. [33, Appendix C]). The logarithm is then
given by
                − log ρΦb = −hΩ|Φ − q̂ − log f (q̂)eip̂hΩ|Φ ∆Φ e−ip̂hΩ|Φ f ∗ (q̂) .
                                                                                 
                                                                                    (2.12)
Because the remaining operators inside the logarithm do not commute, the exact expression
for the entropy, described in section 5, is somewhat complicated. The reason for the com-
plications is that despite appearances, the state |Φ, f ⟩ describes a state with entanglement
between the quantum field degrees of freedom and the asymptotic charge q̂, coming from
the dressing factors eip̂hΩ (·)e−ip̂hΩ for quantum field theory operators in the crossed product
algebra.
    However, when comparing to standard treatments of the generalized entropy, there is
a useful further restriction on the class of states. This involves taking the wavefunction
f (q) to be slowly varying, or, alternatively, taking its Fourier transform f˜(p) to be sharply
peaked at low momentum. Since p̂ has the interpretation of the time shift generated by
the asymptotic charge, these states describe semiclassical geometries in which this global
time variable is well-localized. Away from this limit, the quantum field operators experience
significant smearing in time due to the factors of eip̂hΩ acting on the wavefunction f (q). In
keeping with the notation of previous works [30, 31, 33], we will refer to states with f (q)
slowly varying as semiclassical states.
    For semiclassical states, it is valid to treat the operator p̂ as a small parameter, and
expand the logarithm in (2.12) in powers of p̂. Since we will be taking an expectation value
in the state |f ⟩, each factor of p̂ in the expansion will eventually act on a wavefunction,
resulting in a suppression by derivatives of f (see section 5 for a precise derivation of this
expansion). The strict semiclassical entropy comes from keeping only the leading O(p̂0 ) term
in the expansion, for which the term inside the logarithm in (2.12) becomes |f (q̂)|2 ∆Φ . The
entropy formula in the semiclassical limit then becomes [30, 31, 33]

                          b − log ρ b |Φ⟩
               S(ρΦb ) = ⟨Φ|                 b − hΩ|Φ + hΦ − q̂ − log |f (q̂)|2 |Φ⟩
                                       b ≈ ⟨Φ|                                   b          (2.13)
                                   Φ
                                                                     q
                                          = −Srel (Φ||Ω) − ⟨q̂⟩Φb + Sf                      (2.14)

This entropy formula will be key for arriving at a second law for gravitational crossed product
algebras in section 3.3.


3    Semiclassical generalized second law
Having introduced crossed product algebras and derived the entropy formula for semiclassical
states, the next task is to relate this formula to the generalized second law for Killing horizons.
This involves comparing the entropies computed for a state on two different crossed product
algebras associated with different cuts of the future Killing horizon, and demonstrating that
this entropy monotonically increases. Doing so invokes two key insights from Wall’s original
proof of the GSL [38]. The first is the observation that for vacuum states of the horizon
algebra, the modular Hamiltonian for an arbitrary horizon cut generates a geometric flow
along the horizon. The algebraic explanation for this property is that nested cuts of the

                                                11
                                                               Hλ+
                                               Rλ′
                                                          cλ                  Rλ

                                                               Hb+
                           Rb′
                                                     b
                                                                     Rb




Figure 1: The two-sided AdS black hole is shown in the Penrose diagram above. The bifurcation surface
is labeled as the point b, and Hb+ denotes the half of the event horizon to the future of b. Hb+ serves
as a Cauchy surface for the right exterior region Rb , shown in blue. The causal complement Rb′ involving
the left exterior of the black hole is shown in green. The red dot labeled cλ denotes a cut of the future
horizon, and the portion of the horizon to the future of this cut, Hλ+ , is a Cauchy surface for the
subregion Rλ in the right exterior, depicted by the red lines. The causal complement of this region is
Rλ′ , labeled by the orange lines, and consists of the entire left exterior as well as a portion of the black
hole interior.


horizon define half-sided modular inclusions [42, 43], which follows, as we review below,
from the average null energy condition. The second key insight is the relation between the
relative entropy of states of the quantum fields outside a horizon cut and the generalized
entropy of the same region. We give a novel derivation of the geometric formulas leading to
this identity in section 3.2, utilizing recent analyses of the phase space of general relativity
on null Cauchy surfaces. This derivation directly relates the identity to similar relations
employed by JSS in the construction of gravitational algebras for general subregions [33].
Applied to semiclassical states for the crossed product algebras, these two insights reduce the
GSL to the monotonicity of relative entropy under algebra inclusions, thereby reproducing
Wall’s proof.


3.1     Half-sided modular inclusions for horizon cuts

The first step in formulating the GSL in terms of crossed product algebras is to demonstrate
that quantum field theory algebras associated with nested horizon cuts define half-sided
modular inclusions. This fact was originally established for free and superrenormalizable
theories by Wall [38] (although not using the terminology of half-sided modular inclusions),
and arguments extending this result to arbitrary interacting quantum field theories have
been given by Casini, Teste, and Torroba [39], and Witten [40]. This section serves as a
review of these results, presented in a way that is directly amenable to application to the
generalized second law for black holes.

                                                     12
    For the initial discussion, we consider the case of a two-sided black hole in asymptotically
anti-de Sitter space, shown in figure 1; generalizations including asymptotically flat and de
Sitter black holes will be discussed in section 4. AdS asymptotics have the advantage that
boundary conditions prevent radiation from escaping through infinity, which implies that
the black hole event horizon H for the right asymptotic region defines a complete Cauchy
surface for the spacetime. H forms one component of a bifurcate Killing horizon, and we
denote the associated Killing vector as ξ a and the bifurcation surface at which ξ a vanishes
as b. The bifurcation surface divides H into two pieces, Hb+ to the future and Hb− to the
past. Hb+ is a Cauchy surface for the right exterior region of the black hole, denoted Rb , and
we define B = A(Rb ) to be the type III1 von Neumann algebra of quantum fields restricted
to this region.
    To describe the horizon cut algebra, it is convenient to employ Gaussian null coordinates
(u, v, y A ) near H (see appendix B.2). In these coordinates, H is located at u = 0, and
v is the affine parameter for the null horizon generator la , which on H is related to the
                                  1 a
Killing vector according to la = κv ξ , where κ is the horizon surface gravity. The bifurcation
surface lies at u = v = 0, and all surfaces of constant v are null hypersurfaces associated
with ingoing light rays that intersect H . The coordinate u is an affine parameter for the
null tangent vector na for these light rays, which is normalized at H to satisfy n · l = −1.
A horizon cut cλ is specified by a function λ(y A ) as the surface v = λ(y A ) on H . The cut
divides the horizon into a future component Hλ+ and a past component Hλ− , with Hλ+
serving as a Cauchy surface for the region Rλ in the right exterior that is spacelike separated
from the cut. The quantum field theory algebra for this region is denoted Cλ = A(Rλ ), and
the nesting of the regions Rλ ⊂ Rb implies the inclusion of the associated algebras Cλ ⊂ B.
    The crucial object in demonstrating that this inclusion is half-sided modular is the average
null energy operator, defined in terms of an integral of the quantum field stress tensor Tab
over given null geodesic γy on the horizon at fixed y A as
                                   Z                Z ∞
                              A               a b
                          P (y ) =    dv Tab l l =      dv Tvv (v, y A ).                  (3.1)
                                     γy               −∞


We will make use of smeared versions of this operator with respect to a function ρ(y A ),
defined as the stress-energy flux associated with the vector ρla ,
                                            Z ∞ Z
                                                        √
                          Z
                                a  b
                  Pρ = −     T b ρl ϵa... =    dv dy A q Tvv (v, y A ) ρ(y A ).   (3.2)
                           H                 −∞

Here, the orientation conventions for the volume forms are ϵ = −l ∧ η, where ϵ is the
                                     √
spacetime volume form, and η = qdv ∧ dy 1 ∧ . . . ∧ dy d−2 is the induced volume form on
                                                                                  √
the horizon relative the affinely parameterized null normal, i.e. η = il ϵ, and q determinant
of the spatial metric on the horizon. Pρ generates a geometric action on fields localized on
the horizon, translating a local operator O(v, y A ) along the null coordinate to an operator
eisPρ O(v, y A )e−isPρ = Õ(v + sρ(y A ), y A ) at the shifted affine coordinate v + sρ(y A ). The
precise form of the translated operator Õ depends on its spin and scaling dimension, but
the important point is that Pρ sends local operators on the horizon to local operators at the
translated coordinate.

                                               13
    Away from H , Pρ generates a nonlocal action on individual operators since the vector
field ρla does not extend to a Killing vector on the full spacetime. However, its geometric
action on horizon operators implies an overall geometric action on the algebras determined
by horizon cuts. Schematically, because Hλ+ serves as a Cauchy surface for the region Rλ
exterior to the cut, the operators in Rλ are dynamically determined by the operators on
Hλ+ . Hence, because eisPρ translates operators located on Hλ+ to operators located on the
translated future horizon Hλ+sρ+
                                  , we should expect it to map the full algebra Cλ associated
with Rλ into the algebra Cλ+sρ associated with the exterior region Rλ+sρ for the translated
cut. This argument for the geometric action of Pρ on the algebras Cλ was first made by
Wall in the case of free field theories by taking advantage of the fact that one can obtain
a nontrivial horizon algebra by smearing certain local operators with functions supported
purely on H [38]. For interacting field theories, the argument is more subtle because local
operators must be smeared over open regions in spacetime in order to produce operators
with finite fluctuations [50]. Here, we will describe an argument due to Witten [40] for the
validity of this geometric action for interacting field theories; closely related arguments were
originally given by Casini, Teste, and Torroba [39].
    Although there are no well-defined operators that are smeared solely on the horizon
in interacting theories, the unsmeared local operators O(x) nevertheless have finite matrix
elements ⟨χ|O(x)|ϕ⟩ for a sufficiently large number of states |ϕ⟩, |χ⟩ in the QFT Hilbert
space HQFT . For example, these states could be obtained by acting on the vacuum with
operators smeared in a region spacelike separated from O(x). Such an object is known as a
sesquilinear form, defined as a map s(|χ⟩, |ϕ⟩) from vectors in a domain D(s) ⊂ HQFT to C
that is conjugate linear in the first argument and linear in the second [51]. Sesquilinear forms
generalize the notion of an unbounded operator to objects such as O(x) which make sense
inside of certain matrix elements but tend to produce nonnormalizable states when acting
on a vector. The domain associated to a given local operator O(x), viewed as a sesquilinear
                                                                             1           1
form, is expected to be dense in HQFT , since, for example, the object (1+H)   n O(x) (1+H)n will

be a bounded operator for sufficiently high powers of n, where H is the positive Hamiltonian
associated with global future-directed time evolution [52, 53]; the domain of O(x) is then
contained in the domain of H n . Hence, the future horizon of a cut Hλ+ is associated with a
set Sλ of densely defined sesquilinear forms constructed from local operators on Hλ+ , even
though none of these define true operators with finite fluctuations on HQFT .
     The full algebra Cλ can be constructed from Sλ by taking a double commutant. A
bounded operator b′ is said   to commutewith a sesquilinear form s if b′ preserves the domain
D(s) and s (b′ )† |χ⟩, |ϕ⟩ = s |χ⟩, b′ |ϕ⟩ for all |χ⟩, |ϕ⟩ ∈ D(s). For the forms defined by
                           

local operators, this condition simply states that ⟨χ|b′ O(x)|ϕ⟩ = ⟨χ|O(x)b′ |ϕ⟩ in states
for which these expressions are finite. The commutant Sλ′ is then an algebra of bounded
operators localized in the region Rλ′ to the left of the cut, shown in figure 1. Taking a second
commutant results in the algebra of operators to the right of the cut, Cλ = Sλ′′ , which is a
von Neumann algebra since it is defined as a commutant of a collection of bounded operators
Sλ′ . Note that Sλ′ itself need not be a von Neumann algebra, since Sλ is not an algebra of
bounded operators, and hence is not contained in Cλ . The full algebra for the region Rλ′
can be defined as A(Rλ′ ) = Cλ′ = Sλ′′′ . The geometric action of Pρ on local operators on the
horizon implies that eisPρ Sλ e−isPρ = Sλ+sρ . It is also clear then that eisPρ will conjugate

                                               14
elements of Sλ′ into operators that commute with Sλ+sρ , and hence eisPρ Sλ′ e−isPρ = Sλ+sρ
                                                                                       ′
                                                                                            .
                                      ′′                              isPρ    −isPρ
The same argument applies to Cλ = Sλ , and hence we conclude that e Cλ e            = Cλ+sρ ,
showing that the geometric action of Pρ extends to the horizon cut algebras as a whole.
    We now apply this result on the geometric action of the null translations to the algebra
B = C0 associated with the exterior of the horizon bifurcation surface. Fixing a nonneg-
ative profile for the smearing function λ(y A ), we define Uλ (s) = eisPλ to be the unitary
implementing a finite null translation. By the above discussion, we find that for s ≥ 0,

                                  Uλ (s)BUλ (s)† = Csλ ⊆ B.                                (3.3)

This is one necessary condition in order to conclude that Uλ (s) generates a half-sided trans-
lation for B, a concept introduced by Borchers [41, 42]. The other conditions are that Uλ (s)
have a positive generator, and that it preserve a vacuum state |Ω⟩ that is cyclic and sepa-
rating for B. Positivity of the generator Pλ is implied by the average null energy condition
(ANEC) [54–56], since Pλ is an integral of the average null energy of each horizon generator,
weighted by a positive function λ. Rigorous proofs of the ANEC exist for interacting field
theories in Minkowski space [57–59]. In curved spacetimes, it is generally expected to hold for
achronal null geodesics for backgrounds satisfying the semiclassical Einstein equation [60–64].
In the present context, since the horizon generators are achronal, it is reasonable to assume
that the ANEC holds for them, implying that the Pλ are positive operators. The vacuum
state |Ω⟩ is then simply a ground state for the smeared average null energy operator, satisfy-
ing Pλ |Ω⟩ = 0. Note that since average null energy operators on different horizon generators
commute, any other choice of smearing ρ yields an operator satisfying [Pρ , Pλ ] = 0, and
hence |Ω⟩ can be defined as a simultaneous ground state of all smeared horizon average null
energy operators [38].
    Together, the conditions (i) Pλ ≥ 0, (ii) Uλ (s)BUλ (s)† ⊆ B for s ≥ 0, and (iii) Pλ |Ω⟩ = 0
with |Ω⟩ cyclic and separating for B imply that Uλ (s) defines a half-sided translation for B.
Borchers’s theorem for half-sided translations then states that the modular flow ∆−is Ω for the
vector |Ω⟩ combines with translations to form a unitary representation of the one-dimensional
affine group, with the relation

                                  ∆−is      is
                                   Ω Uλ (t)∆Ω = Uλ (e
                                                      2πs
                                                          t).                              (3.4)

This relation holds for any choice of smearing λ since |Ω⟩ is the simultaneous ground state
of all smeared translation generators Pλ .
    Specializing for the moment to the constant smearing λ = 1, we can demonstrate that
modular flow acts geometrically on local operators on the horizon. We first express a given
horizon operator O(v) (leaving the y A dependence implicit) as the translation of an operator
at v = 0, O(v) = U1 (v)O1 (0)U1 (v)† . Because O1 (0) lies on the bifurcation surface, it should
commute with operators in both B and B ′ , and hence modular flow should map it to another
local operator at v = 0, ∆−is          is
                          Ω O1 (0)∆Ω = O2 (0). Then we find that

       ∆−is    is    −is         is   −is     † is
        Ω O(v)∆Ω = ∆Ω U1 (v)∆Ω O2 (0)∆Ω U1 (v) ∆Ω = U1 (e
                                                          2πs
                                                              v)O2 (0)U1 (e2πs v)
                  = O3 (e2πs v),                                                           (3.5)

                                              15
for some local
              operator  O3 . This is precisely the form of a geometric flow along the vector
            ∂ a    2π a
field 2πv ∂v = κ ξ , whose generator can be expressed as an integral over the horizon of
the stress tensor weighted by ξ a . From this argument, we conclude that the vacuum modular
Hamiltonian hBΩ for B is given by
                                                            Z ∞ Z
                                                                       √
                                       Z
                B                   2π       a b
               hΩ = − log ∆Ω = −           T b ξ ϵa... = 2π     dv dy A q Tvv v.        (3.6)
                                     κ H                     −∞


    Because we did not specify the form of the operator O3 in equation (3.5), in principle we
only determine hBΩ up to transformations that fix its location such as local Lorentz or internal
symmetry transformations. However, the fact that equation (3.4) implies the commutation
relation
                                     [hBΩ , P1 ] = −i2πP1                                  (3.7)
fixes the form of hBΩ in terms of the stress tensor, up to terms that commute with P1 . Such
terms are related to the algebra at infinity, and are discussed in section 4. Equation (3.6)
is the standard expression for the modular Hamiltonian of the Hartle-Hawking state (in
situations where it exists) in terms of the generator of the Killing symmetry. However, for
more general Killing horizons such as Kerr black holes and Schwarzschild-de Sitter, equation
(3.6) remains valid even though there is no global Hartle-Hawking state.
   Finally, we obtain the form of the modular Hamiltonian for an arbitrary horizon cut Cλ .
First we note that Cλ = Uλ (1)BUλ (1)† , which, along with the relation (3.4) demonstrates
that for s ≥ 0,
                     ∆−is      is
                       Ω,B Cλ ∆Ω,B = Uλ (e
                                           2πs
                                               − 1) Cλ Uλ (e2πs − 1)† ⊆ Cλ .         (3.8)
Assuming |Ω⟩ is cyclic for Cλ , this property implies that Cλ ⊂ B is a half-sided modular
inclusion, as defined by Wiesbrock [43]. Since Uλ (1)|Ω⟩ = |Ω⟩, the modular operator for Cλ
is simply obtained from ∆B by conjugation: ∆Cλ = Uλ (1)∆B Uλ (−1) (leaving the dependence
on |Ω⟩ implicit). Again applying (3.4), this results in

                                   ∆−is is
                                    B ∆Cλ = Uλ (e
                                                 2πs
                                                     − 1),                                 (3.9)

which leads to the relation for the modular Hamiltonians

                                      hB − hCλ = 2πPλ .                                  (3.10)

Since both hB and Pλ have been expressed in terms of integrals of the stress tensor in
equations (3.6) and (3.2), we see that hCλ may also be expressed as a stress tensor integral
over the horizon according to
                                               Z ∞ Z
                                                          √
                         Z
                      2π       a b
              hCλ = −        T b ζλ ϵa... = 2π     dv dy A q Tvv · (v − λ(y A )),     (3.11)
                       κ H                      −∞

where we have defined ζλa = ξ a − κλla . This is Wall’s expression for the horizon-cut modular
Hamiltonian [38].
    The argument described above for deriving this equation for interacting theories using
half-sided translations and modular inclusions was first given for Rindler horizons by Casini,

                                              16
Teste, and Torroba [39]. The idea to define the exterior algebras Cλ as a double commutant
of a set Sλ of sesquilinear forms consisting of local operators on the horizon appears in a
lecture by Witten [40], and immediately allows one to see that the horizon average null
energy operators generate half-sided translations. The idea to relate the geometric action
of modular Hamiltonians on Killing horizons to half-sided modular inclusions appears in
work by Summers and Verch [65], and is closely related to older arguments by Sewell for the
Hawking temperature of Killing horizons in the Wightman formulation of axiomatic quantum
field theory [66]. These latter two works attempt to make sense of a net of operators strictly
localized to the Killing horizon, which appears to only be valid in free field theory. In
interacting theories, there are arguments that no bounded operators can be strictly localized
to a finite affine parameter interval of a codimension-1 null surface [50], and in this case one
must use the more sophisticated arguments developed by Casini, Teste, and Torroba, and
Witten to conclude that horizon cuts define half-sided modular inclusions.



3.2    Geometric horizon identities

Connecting the results in section 3.1 on the form of the horizon cut modular Hamiltonian to
the generalized entropy requires a discussion of how the quantum fields couple to gravity in
the semiclassical limit GN → 0. This limit suppresses backreaction, allowing for a description
in terms of quantum fields on the fixed black hole geometry. However, we must also account
for the gravitational constraints when constructing a theory that consistently embeds into
the interacting theory away from GN = 0. These constraints lead to relations between the
stress-energy on the horizon and the values of asymptotic gravitational charges evaluated at
the future and past boundaries of the horizon c±∞ located at v → ±∞. In addition, semilocal
constraints associated with one side of a horizon cut lead to formal relations between the area
of the cut and the asymptotic charges, which are necessary for establishing the equivalence
of the entropy of the gravitational algebra and the horizon generalized entropy. In this
section, we review how these constraints arise and present a novel derivation of the quasilocal
identity relating the horizon area and one-sided boost energy. This identity is originally due
to Wall [38]; see also [32] for a related recent treatment.
    The structure of the constraints and asymptotic charges can be derived from the√clas-
sical theory at finite GN ; from these one can obtain perturbative expressions in the GN
expansion that then apply in the semiclassical quantum theory. Due to the choice of AdS
asymptotics, the black hole horizon H serves as a null Cauchy surface for the spacetime.
The canonical formulation of general relativity on null surfaces has been the subject of several
recent investigations [67–73] and can immediately be applied in the present context to derive
the form of the Hamiltonians and constraints for the geometric flows considered in section
3.1. We will simply quote some of the main results needed from the canonical analysis in
this section; additional details can be found in appendix C and in the cited references.
   We denote by ϕ the dynamical fields in the theory, which consist of the metric gab and any
matter fields ψ. On the null Cauchy surface, one can define a symplectic potential current
E[ϕ; δϕ] which, assuming minimal coupling between matter and gravity, is expressed as a

                                              17
sum of a gravitational term and a matter term,

                                          E = E g + E ψ.                                     (3.12)

The gravitational piece, after imposing the gauge conditions given in (C.7), takes the form
                                                                    
                     g                  1      ab      d − 3 ab
                    E [gab ; δgab ] =       η σ δqab −      Θq δqab ,                 (3.13)
                                      16πGN            d−2

where η is the volume form on H , qab is the degenerate induced metric, Θ = ∇a la is the
                                  1
expansion, and σab = 12 £l qab − d−2 Θqab is the shear, which vanishes in the background but
is nonvanishing once we consider perturbative fluctuations of the geometry. The matter
symplectic potential E ψ is theory dependent, but for definiteness one can have in mind a
scalar field φ, for which
                                      E φ = η(la ∇a φ)δφ.                              (3.14)
The symplectic form is obtained from E by integrating its antisymmetric variation over the
Cauchy surface H ,                       Z                         
                         Ω[δ1 ϕ, δ2 ϕ] =     δ1 E[δ2 ϕ] − δ2 E[δ1 ϕ] .              (3.15)
                                            H

   For a vector field ζ a tangent to H , the associated Hamiltonian Hζ can be defined as (see
equation (C.18))

                                                   d − 3 ab
       Z                         Z                                Z
                            1         
                                         ab
 Hζ =     E[ϕ; £ζ ϕ] =               η σ £ζ qab −       Θq £ζ qab −     (T(ψ) )ab ζ b ϵa... . (3.16)
        H                16πGN H                   d−2                H

which displays the contributions from both the gravitational field and the matter stress
tensor (T(ψ) )ab . This object generates the flow of the diffeomorphism ζ a on the gravitational
phase space since it satisfies Hamilton’s equation

                                        δHζ = Ω[δϕ, £ζ ϕ],                                   (3.17)

which holds off-shell as long as ζ a preserves the asymptotic boundary conditions imposed at
v → ±∞.
   Due to diffeomorphism invariance, the stress-energy density E[ϕ; £ζ ϕ] can be written
as a total derivative dMζ , with Mζ defined in equation (C.13), up to a term involving the
constraint equation Cζ ,
                                  E[ϕ; £ζ ϕ] = dMζ + Cζ ,                           (3.18)

RIntegrating this relation over H yields a formula expressing the integrated constraint C[ζ]±=
  H
     Cζ in terms of the generator of the diffeomorphism Hζ and the asymptotic charges Qζ ,
                                                       −
                                     C[ζ] = Hζ − Q+
                                                  ζ + Qζ ,                                   (3.19)

where                                           Z
                                         Q±
                                          ζ =           Mζ .                                 (3.20)
                                                  c±∞


                                                18
    We now specialize to the vector fields that are relevant to the discussion of half-sided
modular inclusions considered in section 3.1, all of which are parallel to the null generator
la on H . They have the property of being quasi-Killing vectors,1 meaning that they satisfy
Killing’s equation £ζ gab = 0 only on H , i.e. they are symmetries of the horizon which may
not extend to symmetries of the full spacetime. A generic quasi-Killing vector parallel to la
on H can be written in terms of a function τ (v, y A ) as (see appendix B.3)

                                             ζ a = τ la + u∇a τ.                              (3.21)

The choice τ = κv yields the global Killing vector ξ a = κvla − κuna , while τ = λ(y A ) results
in the smeared null translation that appears in the average null energy operator (3.2).
    The boost vector ζλa occurring in the modular Hamiltonian for a horizon cut is also quasi-
Killing, arising from the smearing τ (v, y A ) = κ(v − λ(y A )) which leads to the expression
                                     h                            i
                             ζλa = κ (v − λ)la − uλna − u∇a λ .                            (3.22)

This vector vanishes at the horizon cut cλ at which v = λ, and its covariant derivative there
satisfies
                                                c
                                      ∇a (ζλ )b =λ κnλab ,                             (3.23)
where
                                        nλab = 2l[a (nb] + ∇b] λ)                             (3.24)
is the unit binormal to cλ . To see this, note that the cut is defined by the relations u = 0
and v − λ(y A ) = 0, so (3.24) is proportional to the unit binormal since na = −∇a v. To verify
it is unit-normalized, we compute
                                                                      2
                                                                         H
                                                       
                       nλab nab
                             λ  = 2(l · l)|n + dλ|2
                                                    − 2  l · (n + dλ)    = −2.           (3.25)


    It is notable that κ in equation (3.23) is constant, since it means that the modular
flow for the horizon cut corresponds to a boost with constant surface gravity. This is a
nontrivial verification of the geometric modular flow conjecture from [33], which states that
a modular flow should look like a constant-surface-gravity boost near the entangling surface.
Constancy of κ can be viewed as a zeroth law of modular flow, since it is closely related to
the KMS condition for the modular flow on the horizon cut algebra. It is notable that κ
is constant for a generic cut of the horizon, and does not depend on quantities such as the
extrinsic curvature of the codimension-2 cut, which is nonzero in the u direction away from
the bifurcation surface.
   For the translation quasi-Killing vector λla + u∇a λ, the gravitational contribution to the
energy density obtained from (3.13) is
                                               1                d − 3 2
                          E g [£λl gab ] =        η λ σ ab σab −      Θ ,                     (3.26)
                                             8πGN                d−2
  1
    This terminology was introduced by Bob Wald in a talk related to his work with Hollands and Zhang
on dynamical black hole entropy [74].


                                                     19
which motivates the definition of the gravitational null energy density as2
                                                            
                              (g)    1       ab      d−3 2
                             tvv =          σ σab −        Θ .                                            (3.27)
                                   8πGN              d−2

Note that this definition of gravitational null energy makes sense in principle on generic null
surfaces, not only for perurbations of a Killing horizon. On the other hand, the potential
Mλl evaluates to (see equation (C.25))

                                                         1
                                            Mλl = −         µλΘ,                                          (3.28)
                                                       8πGN

with µ the induced (d − 2)-form that pulls back to the area form on cuts of H . From this,
we can then integrate equation (3.18) between two horizon cuts v = τ1 (y A ) and v = τ2 (y A )
to derive a relation between the expansions at the two cuts,
                     Z         Z             Z
                1                                     
                                                                (ψ) a b
                                                                        
                          µλΘ −      µλΘ = −        ηλ t(g)
                                                        vv  + Tab  l l    + C21 [λl] (3.29)
              8πGN     τ2         τ1            H12



where C21 [λl] is the integral of the constraint Cλl over H12 .
   Equation (3.29) can be viewed as an integrated version of the Raychaudhuri equation,3
which highlights the interpretation of the terms in the equation as contributions from the
matter and gravitational null energy. As the second cut τ2 approaches future infinity on the
horizon, the expansion must go to zero as a boundary condition specifying that H is an
event horizon [38, 75]. This limit results in an expression for the expansion on a cut cτ in
terms of the semi-infinite null energy (once the constraints Cλl = 0 are imposed)
                             Z                 Z
                         1                +
                                                      
                                                         (g)    (ψ)
                                                                        
                                 µλΘ = Pτ =         ηλ tvv   + Tab la lb .            (3.30)
                      8πGN cτ                   Hτ+


   Another useful relation comes from examining the charges for the boost vector ζλa . From
equation (C.25), the potential Mζλ evaluates to
                                       κ                
                              Mζλ =        µ 1 − (v − λ)Θ ,                           (3.31)
                                     8πGN

and after integrating the flux-balance equation (3.18) between the cut cλ at which ζλa vanishes
and infinity, we obtain
                                              Z
                   κ                    +
                                                            
                                                                      (ψ) a b
                                                                              
                       (A∞ − Aλ ) = Hζλ = κ         η(v − λ) t(g)
                                                              vv  + Tab  l l    ,        (3.32)
                 8πGN                          Hλ+

   2
      Closely related expressions for the gravitational energy associated with generic null surfaces were recently
explored in [70].
    3
      An alternative way to obtain this formula is to write d(Θµ) = (Θ̇+Θ2 )η with Θ̇ = la ∇a Θ. One then uses
                                                     d−3 2                (ψ)
the Raychaudhuri equation to obtain Θ̇ + Θ2 = d−2        Θ − σ ab σab − Tab la lb + Cl , with Cl = 0 a component
of the Einstein equation.


                                                       20
again using the future boundary condition Θ+∞ = 0 and imposing the constraint Cζλ = 0.
This is the nonlinear version of Wall’s relation [38] between the difference of horizon areas
(A∞ − Aλ ) and the one-sided boost energy Hζ+λ . It also is the identity corresponding to
the local Smarr relation discussed by JSS [33], specialized to the case of a cut of a Killing
                                                                                    (ψ)
horizon. Note that the boost energy contains both a matter contribution from Tab and a
                             (g)
gravitational contribution tvv involving the shear and expansion according to (3.27). This
latter contribution will become the graviton null energy density when quantizing around the
Killing horizon background.
   The crossed product algebra is the result of imposing the global constraint (3.19) for
ζλa , which is the quasi-Killing vector that preserves the horizon cut. We already found in
equation (3.32) that the future asymptotic charge is given by the late time area of the event
horizon,
                                               κA∞
                                      Q+ ζλ =       .                                  (3.33)
                                              8πGN
The asymptotic gravitational charge at past infinity is given by
                                                  Z             
                           −           κ
                        Qζλ = lim             Aτ −      µ(v − λ)Θ .                    (3.34)
                               τ →−∞ 8πGN            cτ

                                                              τ →−∞
Unlike the future horizon boundary, we cannot impose Θ −→ 0 since the asymptotic
value of Θ is determined via (3.30) by the total average null energy on the horizon. This
raises the possibility that Q− ζλ could diverge in the limit. However, at least when working
perturbatively about a Killing horizon, the expansion Θ remains small up to late time scales
of order v ∼ O( G1N ). In this perturbative regime, the terms growing linearly with v in the
area Aτ cancel against the linear term in v in the integral involving the expansion in (3.34),
resulting in a finite expression if we take τ → −∞ and GN → 0 with |τ | ≪ G1N .
    Since we will mostly be concerned with the algebra to the future of a cut, the precise
expression for the left asymptotic charge will not enter into the entropy calculations. It
suffices to know that such a left asymptotic charge can be defined, after which the constraint
(3.19) can be written
                                                 κ
                                C[ζλ ] = Hζλ −       A∞ + Q− ζλ                         (3.35)
                                               8πGN
                                                                R
It is, however, interesting to note that the expression Aτ − cτ µvΘ has recently appeared
in the dynamical entropy proposal of Hollands, Wald, and Zhang [74], who showed that this
combination can be interpreted as the area of an apparent horizon inside the black hole event
horizon (see also [76]). As τ → −∞, this apparent horizon approaches the white hole event
horizon for the left asymptotic region. In general, when there is nonzero null energy flux
through H , the Einstein-Rosen bridge connecting the left and right regions becomes longer,
causing the left white hole event horizon to differ from the right black hole event horizon.
Hence, we can use the above result to rewrite the left asymptotic charge in terms of the left
white hole event horizon asymptotic area Awh  −∞ and the asymptotic expansion Θ−∞ as
                                                  Z              
                              −        κ      wh
                            Qζλ =           A−∞ +       µλΘ−∞ .                         (3.36)
                                    8πGN            c−∞


                                             21
Taking into account the identity (3.30) in the limit τ → −∞, we see that the correction in
Q−ζλ to the left event horizon area involves the total average null energy flux through the
horizon, weighted by λ(y A ).
    We now turn to the description of the various relations above in the small GN limit,
which allows for perturbative quantization of the matter fields and gravitons about the
                                                                                   0
Killing horizon background. The metric can be expanded about its background value gab as
                                                     0
                                              gab = gab + κhab                                           (3.37)
             √
where κ = 32πGN ; this choice ensures that hab has a canonical kinetic term in the quadratic
Lagrangian. Similarly, the degenerate metric on H is expanded as
                                 0             κ
                        qab = qab  + κρab +       ρq 0 ,    q0ab ρab = 0,                  (3.38)
                                             d − 2 ab
and because the shear and expansion vanish in the background, to leading order in κ they
are given by
                                           κ           κ
                                     σab = £l ρab ≡ ρ̇ab                                   (3.39)
                                            2          2
                                           κ        κ
                                      Θ = £l ρ ≡ ρ̇.                                       (3.40)
                                            2        2
This then implies that the graviton null energy density, given by (3.27), is finite as GN → 0.
Additionally, the expansion is constrained to satisfy (3.30) for all choices of smearing λ. Since
the right hand side is O(κ 0 ), it must be that the expansion can be nonzero only at O(κ 2 ),
implying that in the linear theory, ρ̇ = 0, and the graviton null energy density simplifies to
                                                t(g)    ab
                                                 vv = ρ̇ ρ̇ab .                                          (3.41)
Note that this energy density differs from the Hollands-Wald canonical energy considered
in [75] by a total derivative which integrates to zero over the horizon.
    The vanishing of the expansion at O(κ) implies the horizon area is constant at linear
                                 (1)
order. Its value is then set by A∞ , the O(κ) term in the expansion of the late time horizon
area, which we choose to set to zero as a boundary condition; fluctuations in the area at this
order have the interpretation of describing different background spacetimes.4 On the other
                                                    (2)
hand, the O(κ 2 ) term in the late time area, A∞ , does interact nontrivially with the matter
fields, and hence we include it as a global gravitational charge. Together with the second
order contribution to the left gravitational charge (Q−             (2)
                                                                ζλ ) , the global constraint (3.35) for
the linearized theory becomes
                             Z                                             (2)
                                 
                                             (ψ) a b
                                                                       κ A∞
                  (2)
                C [ζλ ] = κ     η t(g)
                                     vv +  Tab  l l    (v −   λ)  −            + (Q−
                                                                                   ζλ )
                                                                                       (2)
                                                                                                 (3.42)
                              H                                       2π  4GN
                                              !
                                          (2)
                            κ           A∞
                        =       hCλ −            + (Q−  ζλ )
                                                            (2)
                                                                                                 (3.43)
                           2π           4GN
   4
    Fluctuations at this order are expected in the canonical ensemble for the black hole, but allowing for
such large fluctuations leads to complications in the construction of the gravitational algebras, and require
working in a formal power series in κ, as in [29]. Restricting fluctuations in the area to be O(κ 2 ) corresponds
to a microcanonical ensemble, as discussed in [30].


                                                       22
where in the second line we have applied the formula (3.11) to write the constraint in
terms of the vacuum modular Hamiltonian of the horizon cut, which, including the graviton
contribution, takes the form
                                                   Z ∞
                                                          √
            Z                             Z
                    (g)    (ψ) a b               A
                                                        dv q t(g)      (ψ)
                                                                             (v − λ(y A )).
                                                                           
   hCλ = 2π     η tvv + Tab l l (v − λ) = 2π dy                vv + Tvv
              H                                             −∞
                                                                                             (3.44)


3.3    Generalized second law for semiclassical states

We now have all the components needed to construct gravitational algebras associated with
horizon cuts and use them to prove a generalized second law. The starting point is the
algebra Cλ associated with the region Rλ spacelike separated from the horizon cut defined by
the function λ(y A ). This algebra describes both matter and graviton degrees of freedom. The
matter will generically involve an interacting quantum field theory; in particular, we will not
make use of any free field relations in the matter sector. In this case, the classical description
of the matter in terms of a Lagrangian and symplectic form may be a poor approximation,
but the general arguments leading to the form of the matter modular Hamiltonian, equation
(3.11) only rely on the existence of a stress tensor as the generator of diffeomorphisms and
positivity of the average null energy. Since all matter couples universally to gravity via
its stress tensor, the matter contribution to the gravitational constraint in equation (3.43)
remains valid even for interacting theories.
    On the other hand, the gravitons are quantized as a decoupled theory of free, massless,
spin-2 particles, obtained by promoting the metric perturbation hab in (3.37) to a quantum
operator and performing canonical quantization with appropriate gauge-fixing conditions
for linearized diffeomorphisms. This is the correct description in the GN → 0 limit, which
suppresses self-interactions between gravitons as well as direct matter-graviton couplings.
The ability to treat gravitons as free fields is important at a technical level, since gravitational
interactions are nonrenormalizable, causing the theory to become strongly coupled at the
Planck length. A description in this regime would require a fully nonperturbative theory
of quantum gravity, and it is widely expected that the language of quantum field theory is
not applicable at such energy scales. However, assuming the low energy gravitational theory
admits an effective field theory description [77, 78], the free graviton approximation should
give an accurate description at leading order in GN . In this case, the classical phase space
analysis described in section 3.2 is directly relevant, and the graviton contribution to the
                                (g)
constraint (3.42) is given by tvv defined in (3.41), which is quadratic in the graviton field.
   The gravitational algebra additionally includes degrees of freedom associated with the
asymptotic charges Q± λ . As discussed in section 3.2, these charges are constructed from the
    2
O(κ ) contribution to the metric perturbation, and hence are not present in the linearized
theory involving only gravitons [32]. In the interacting theory away from GN = 0, these
asymptotic charges are present and are related to the matter and graviton stress energy,
which is nontrivial even in the linearized theory. Hence, in order to obtain a theory at
GN = 0 that consistently lifts to the interacting theory, we must include the asymptotic

                                                23
charges explicitly and couple them to the matter fields via the constraint (3.42).5
   The O(κ 2 ) contribution to the asymptotic horizon area comprises the future asymptotic
charge Q+λ that must be included. We represent this operator on an independent Hilbert
space Hasy = L2 (R) as the position operator,

                                                             (2)
                                                         A∞
                                                  q̂ = −     .                                             (3.45)
                                                         4GN

This choice reflects two semiclassical assumptions about the spectrum of the asymptotic area
operator, namely that it is continuous and unbounded above and below. The continuous
spectrum of this operator implies that we are working in a description that does not resolve
individual microstates of the black hole, which ultimately manifests in the constant shift
ambiguity in the crossed product entropy. The unboundedness of the spectrum corresponds
to the fact that we are considering perturbations of the area around a fixed background, and
because the perturbation only describes changes in the geometry at order κ 2 , it can take on
large positive or negative values in the κ → 0 limit without producing a significant change
in the background value of the area.
    The algebra of gravitationally dressed operators is denoted Cbλ , and is constructed by
imposing the constraint (3.43) to obtain a gauge-invariant Hilbert space and operators,
following the procedure described in [31, 33]. This results in the crossed product algebra
discussed in section 2. It is represented on the Hilbert space H b = HQFT ⊗ Hasy , and is given
by
                               Cbλ = eip̂hλ ae−ip̂hλ , q̂ , a ∈ Cλ ,                     (3.46)
              d
where p̂ = −i dq , and hλ ≡ hCλ is the modular Hamiltonian for the horizon cut in the average
null energy vacuum |Ω⟩, given in terms of the matter and graviton stress tensors by equation
(3.44).6
   To examine the generalized second law, we would like to compute entropies of states of
           b = |Φ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩, where |Φ⟩ is a state in HQFT and f is a wavefunction on L2 (R)
the form |Φ⟩
that is slowly varying in the position basis, and hence whose derivatives are suppressed by
   5
     In a complete description, one should also add charges associated with other asymptotic symmetries
such as rotations [29–31]. Including these charges results in additional crossed products with respect to the
symmetries that they generate. They do not change the overall type of the algebra, so they will not affect the
results involving finiteness of the entropy and should not affect the arguments for the semiclassical generalized
second law, so we do not consider them in detail in this work. However, rotational asymptotic charges are
important when obtaining the correct matching conditions for rotating black hole backgrounds [32], so it
would be worth considering them in more detail in the future.
   6
     Another way to interpret this algebra is to view it as the commutant of all operators in Cλ′ as well as a left
asymptotic charge Q−           κ                      −
                       ζλ = − 2π (q̂ + hλ ). Because Qζλ is not the left event horizon area, which in the present
setup matches to the left ADM Hamiltonian, most of the operators in the algebra Cbλ do not commute with
the left ADM Hamiltonian, with functions of q̂ being the exception. This is a somewhat peculiar feature
of this construction, but appears necessary in order to obtain a nontrivial algebra that includes the right
asymptotic charge q̂ as well as a subalgebra isomorphic to the algebra of quantum fields in the region exterior
to the cut. The fact that we can derive a semiclassical second law also supports this prescription for defining
the subregion gravitational algebra, but this subtlety deserves closer consideration in the future.


                                                        24
a small parameter ε. Using the formula for the density matrix for this state given in (2.12),
we can apply the semiclassical expression for the entropy (2.14) to arrive at
                                                        D A(2) E
                                   Cλ                        ∞
                     Sλ (ρΦb ) = −Srel (Φ||Ω) +                        + SfA∞ + O(ε2 ).   (3.47)
                                                         4GN       Φ
                                                                   b


The O(ε2 ) corrections to this semiclassical entropy formula are discussed in section 5.
     We can convert this expression into something involving the generalized entropy by em-
ploying the horizon-cut identity (3.32). The term on the right hand side is proportional to
the one-sided vacuum modular Hamiltonian Kλ , defined by restricting the range of integra-
tion of v in (3.44) to the future of the horizon cut, v > λ(y A ). This defines the formal split
of the modular Hamiltonian hλ = Kλ − Kλ′ into an object Kλ affiliated with Cλ and Kλ′
affiliated with the commutant Cλ′ . The one-sided modular Hamiltonians Kλ , Kλ′ make sense
as densely-defined sesquilinear forms (but not as unbounded operators), similar to the local
operators discussed in section 3.1. Kλ therefore has well-defined expectation values for a
dense set of states. When coupling to gravity, the constraint (3.32) then implies that the
area of the horizon cut, expanded to second order in κ, must also define a sesquilinear form
affiliated with the crossed product algebra,
                                     (2)          (2)
                                   Aλ    A∞
                                       =     − Kλ = −q̂ − Kλ .                            (3.48)
                                   4GN   4GN

    The relative entropy in (3.47) also has an expression in terms of one-sided quantities.
The starting point is the standard expression for the relative entropy between two density
matrices Srel (ρΦ ||ρΩ ) = Tr(ρΦ log ρΦ − ρΦ log ρΩ ) = −S(ρΦ ) + ⟨Φ| − log ρΩ |Φ⟩. Assuming
a regulator to make the one-sided QFT entanglement entropies finite, we can apply this
formula to the relative entropy appearing in (3.47). The density matrix for the horizon
vacuum state |Ω⟩ is thermal with respect to the one-sided modular Hamiltonian, and hence
is formally expressed as
                                                1
                                         ρΩ = e−Kλ ,                                   (3.49)
                                               Z
with the normalization set by the requirement that Kλ have zero expectation value in the
vacuum, ⟨Ω|Kλ |Ω⟩ = 0. The vacuum entanglement entropy is then simply given by log Z:

                                   SΩQFT = ⟨Ω| − log ρΩ |Ω⟩ = log Z.                      (3.50)

From these relations, the relative entropy takes the form
                               Cλ            QFT
                             −Srel (Φ||Ω) = SΦ,λ − log Z − ⟨Kλ ⟩Φ .                       (3.51)

   Applying this to (3.47) and employing the identity (3.48), we arrive at the semiclassical
expression for the crossed product entropy
                                   D A(2) E
                                                     QFT
                     Sλ (ρΦb ) =      λ
                                                  + SΦ,λ + SfA∞ − log Z + O(ε2 ).         (3.52)
                                    4GN       Φ
                                              b


                                                        25
This agrees with the horizon generalized entropy up to a constant, which can be formally
                                                                              (0)   (2)
determined by writing the area perturbation in terms of the background value Aλ as Aλ =
       (0)
Aλ − Aλ . The resulting entropy formula is then
                                                                   !
                          D A E                         (0)
                             λ       QFT              A
              Sλ (ρΦb ) =         + SΦ,λ + SfA∞ −       λ
                                                            + log Z + O(ε2 )       (3.53)
                           4GN Φb                    4GN

The term log Z should be interpreted as quantum field vacuum entanglement entropy, and
hence the above constant in parentheses can be viewed as the generalized entropy in the
vacuum state |Ω⟩ (assuming no contribution from the entropy associated with the asymptotic
area). Crucially, this constant is independent of the horizon cut λ, since the vacuum |Ω⟩
is a stationary state. This constant will therefore drop out when considering differences in
entropies between horizon cuts.
   We now examine the algebra associated with a later cut defined by λ̃(y A ) ≥ λ(y A ). The
quantum field theory algebra Cλ̃ acts on the same Hilbert space as before HQFT , and we
                                                                      (2)
                                                           A∞
once again adjoin the same asymptotic charge q̂ = − 4G       N
                                                                acting on Hasy = L2 (R) when
constructing the gravitational algebra. It is significant at this point that the asymptotic
charge does not depend on the horizon cut λ, which follows from the form of the constraint
(3.43) for a generic boost quasi-Killing vector ζλa . The gravitational algebra again takes the
form of a crossed product,

                               Cbλ̃ = eip̂hλ̃ ae−ip̂hλ̃ , q̂ ,       a ∈ Cλ̃ .           (3.54)

Even though Cλ̃ ⊂ Cλ , the crossed product algebra Cbλ̃ is not a subalgebra of Cbλ in this
representation, since the modular Hamiltonians hλ̃ and hλ associated with different cuts are
not the same.
    An issue that arises when comparing entropies between two type II algebras is that there
may not be an obvious choice for the relative normalizations of the traces. This results in
a potential ambiguity when comparing entropies between the two algebras. In the present
context, we can take advantage of the fact that the algebras share a common operator, the
asymptotic charge q̂, to find a canonical relative normalization for the traces. For both
algebras, the state |Ω⟩
                     b = |Ω⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩ has a density matrix determined by equation (2.8), and
is given by
                                       ρΩb = |f (q̂)|2 eq̂ ,                          (3.55)
which is solely a function of q̂. Normalizing the density matrices for both algebras to agree
precisely with (3.55) then determines the relative normalization for the traces on the algebras,
and in both cases is given by the formula (2.9). This choice ensures that operators in the
subalgebra generated by q̂ have the same trace in both Cbλ̃ and Cbλ .
   Considering the same state |Φ⟩
                                b = |Φ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩ as before, the computation of the entropy for
the algebra Cbλ̃ now proceeds analogously, giving
                                                      D A(2) E
                                      C                    ∞
                      Sλ̃ (ρΦb ) = −Srelλ̃ (Φ||Ω) +                  + SfA∞ + O(ε2 )     (3.56)
                                                          4GN    Φ
                                                                 b


                                                     26
          (2)
        A∞           A∞
Since 4G  N Φb and Sf   depend only on the wavefunction f and the operator q̂, these quanti-
ties agree when computed in either algebra. They will therefore drop out when considering
the difference in entropies Sλ̃ − Sλ . Hence, in the semiclassical limit in which we can ignore
the O(ε2 ) contributions to the entropy, we have that
                                                      C       Cλ
                                 Sλ̃ − Sλ = −Srelλ̃ (Φ||Ω) + Srel (Φ||Ω) ≥ 0                                (3.57)

where the last inequality follows from the monotonicity of relative entropy under the inclusion
Cλ̃ ⊂ Cλ [79–81]. Hence, we have succeeded in showing that in the semiclassical limit ε ≪ 1,
the crossed product entropies increase upon restricting to horizon cuts that are further to
the future. This is the statement of the second law for the crossed product algebras.
    An attractive feature of the second law formulated in terms of crossed product algebras is
that it directly relates the increase in entropy to the monotonicity of relative entropy, with-
out appealing to relations involving involving regulated quantum field theory entanglement
entropies. Of course, we argued above that the crossed product entropy agrees semiclassi-
cally with the generalized entropy by invoking the local gravitational constraint (3.32), so
this monotonicity result can instead be stated directly in terms of generalized entropy. The
formula (3.53) is applicable for the Cbλ̃ algebra as well, and since the constant in parentheses is
independent of the horizon cut, it drops out of the entropy difference. Hence, equation (3.57)
also implies the standard statement of the generalized second law in terms of generalized
entropies,
                            D A E                 D A E
                                                      λ
                                 λ̃
                                       + Sλ̃out −           − Sλout ≥ 0,                    (3.58)
                              4GN Φ b              4GN Φb
                  QFT
where Sλ̃out := SΦ, λ̃
                       + SfA∞ , and similarly for Sλout . This shows that the crossed product
entropies reproduce Wall’s proof of the generalized second law, but they have the added
benefit of giving an algebraic interpretation to the generalized entropies appearing in it.
    One important aspect of this derivation is that it is necessary to work in the representation
where the crossed product algebras take the form (3.46) and (3.54). These representations
have the property that the algebraic intersection consists of operators in the asymptotic
algebra, i.e. Cbλ ∧ Cbλ̃ = ⟨q̂⟩. In some recent investigations of gravitational algebras [29–31], a
unitarily equivalent representation was employed where the algebras take the form

                                C˜λ = e−ip̂hλ Cbλ eip̂hλ = ⟨a, q̂ − hλ ⟩ ,      a ∈ Cλ ,                    (3.59)
                                C˜ = e−ip̂hλ̃ Cb eip̂hλ̃ = ⟨b, q̂ − h ⟩ ,
                                 λ̃              λ̃                     λ̃      b ∈ Cλ̃ .                   (3.60)

The procedure described above of considering the same global state |Φ⟩     b = |Φ⟩ ⊗ |f ⟩ for
the two algebras and then comparing the entropies leads to the conclusion that the entropy
decreases in the semiclassical limit.7 A possibly related pathology with this parameterization
   7
    This entropy is equal to the entropy of the twirled state |Φ̃⟩ = eip̂h |Φ, f ⟩ on the original crossed product
algebra Cbλ . The density matrix for this state is given by equation (A.27), and assuming a slowly varying
wavefunction, the entropy can be approximated by
                                                                       C′
                 S(ρΦ̃ ) ≈ ⟨Φ|hΦ|Ω |Φ⟩ − ⟨f |q̂ + log g(q̂)|f ⟩ = −Srelλ (Φ||Ω) − ⟨f |q̂ + log g(q̂)|f ⟩,   (3.61)


                                                           27
                                                          (2)
                                                A∞
is that the asymptotic charge is now given by 4G  N
                                                     = −q̂ + hλ , which now depends on the
horizon cut λ. The expectation value of this asymptotic charge then evolves as we change
the cut, despite fixing the global state |Φ⟩.
                                          b These issues indicate there we should not use
above parameterization while also fixing the state |Φ⟩.
                                                    b

    As the formulas (3.47) and (3.56) indicate, there are corrections to the entropy in the
gravitational algebras starting at second order in the semiclassical expansion parameter ε.
This immediately raises the question of whether the generalized second law continues to hold
even after including these corrections. This questions is nontrivial because there is not an
obvious way in which the algebra Cbλ̃ embeds as a subalgebra of Cbλ , making it difficult to
appeal to monotonicity results of entropies under algebra inclusions. In order to begin ad-
dressing these questions, in section 5 we compute the corrections to the semiclassical entropy
expression, and discuss various bounds on these corrections. Unfortunately, these corrections
do not ostensibly obey any monotonicity properties, but we leave open the possibility that
a more careful analysis would produce such a result. We also explore in section 6 another
approach in which we identify a subalgebra of Cbλ unitarily equivalent to Cbλ̃ , assuming the
existence of an operator-valued weight between the underlying quantum field theory algebra.
This may ultimately lead to improved monotonicity results for the subleading corrections to
the crossed product entropies.



4     Algebra at infinity

The discussion of the GSL to this point has focused for simplicity on asymptotically AdS
black holes. The Killing horizon is a Cauchy surface for these spacetimes since the Dirichlet
boundary conditions imposed at the AdS boundary cause all outgoing modes to be reflected
back through the black hole horizon. In this case, the quantum field algebra associated
with the horizon is complete, and the gravitational algebra enlarges this only by a single
                                                                      (2)
                                                                    A∞
additional asymptotic charge, the late time area perturbation 4G       N
                                                                          . However, for black holes
with alternative asymptotics, there are outgoing quantum field modes that never enter the
black hole horizon. For asympotically flat black holes, these include modes that propagate
out to future timelike infinity i+ or null infinity I + , while for asymptotically de Sitter black
holes, these include degrees of freedom beyond the cosmological horizon (see figure 2). The
analysis must therefore be generalized to allow for the possibility of these nontrivial algebras,
which we refer to as the algebra at infinity.
    In this section, we describe the treatment of the generalized second law with nontrivial
algebras at infinity. In section 4.1, we describe how this algebra at infinity is naturally
incorporated into algebraic structures associated with half-sided translations, which allow
a generalization of Wall’s discussion of the GSL with an algebra at infinity that applies to
interacting field theories. Following this, section 4.2 describes the general construction of the

which now involves the relative entropy for the commutant quantum field theory algebra Cλ′ . Since the
inclusion for the commutant algebras is reversed, Cλ′ ⊂ Cλ̃′ , monotonicity of relative entropy now causes the
crossed product entropy to decrease between cuts.


                                                     28
                                                                   R∞


                                           cλ


             ···                                                                          ···
                                     b




Figure 2: The extended Schwarzschild-de Sitter spacetime provides an example where one finds an
algebra at infinity for the horizon translation. This spacetime is described as an infinite chain of black
hole and cosmological horizons, indicated by the ellipses “· · · ” in the Penrose diagram above. The algebra
for a cut cλ is defined as all quantum fields supported in the region spacelike to the right of the cut,
shown by the red lines above. The algebra at infinity is associated with the region R∞ shown in purple,
consisting of fields localized beyond the cosmological horizon.


gravitational algebra in these contexts. Finally, section 4.3 discusses some subtleties that
can arise when analyzing rotating black holes and backgrounds involving the Unruh vacuum.


4.1     Semiclassical GSL

Intuitively, the existence of additional degrees of freedom localized far from the black hole
should not affect the derivation of the GSL, since any entropy associated with these degrees
of freedom would appear in the algebra associated with any horizon cut; it should therefore
cancel out in when considering entropy differences between two cuts. Wall gave a precise
version of this argument assuming the existence of a factorization between the algebra as-
sociated with the horizon and the algebra associated with I + [38]. Such a factorization is
expected to hold for free field theories [82], and was recently utilized for the construction of
gravitational algebras associated with arbitrary Killing horizons [32].
    However, there are reasons to believe that this factorization property fails for interacting
theories. Correlation functions of local operators in interacting field theories have stronger
divergences than in free theories, which necessitates smearing the fields in timelike directions
in order to obtain operators with finite fluctuations [38,83,84]. Smearing only on the horizon
is not sufficient, implying that there is no nontrivial algebra of bounded operators localized
solely on a horizon cut Hλ+ [50]. This prevents a decomposition of the horizon cut algebra
Cλ into a tensor product A(Hλ+ ) ⊗ A(∞), since A(Hλ+ ) is trivial. Fortunately, the existence
of a tensor factorization is not strictly necessary in order to derive the GSL. Instead, we will
make use of a weaker condition on the structure of the horizon cut algebra Cλ that follows

                                                    29
from the properties of half-sided translations.
    The argument from section 3.1 that the smeared average null energy operator Pλ generates
a half-sided translation continues to hold for spacetimes with non-AdS asymptotics, provided
that the horizon cut algebra Cλ is defined as the double commutant of local operators on
a Cauchy slice consisting of the future horizon cut Hλ+ and a component Σasy spacelike
separated from the horizon. For example, in asymptotically flat spacetimes, Σasy consists of
I + and a contribution from i+ if massive fields are present. Since Pλ is an integral of the
stress tensor only over the horizon H , it acts trivially on operators localized to Σasy , which
are associated purely with outgoing modes that do not interact with the horizon H . This
allows us to characterize the algebra B∞ associated with Σasy as the collection of operators
in B (the algebra associated with the exterior of the bifurcation surface) that are invariant
under the translations,
                                B∞ := {a ∈ B|eitPλ ae−itPλ = a}                             (4.1)

   The properties of such a fixed point algebra under the action of a half-sided translation
were studied by Borchers [85], who showed that the algebra can equivalently be defined as
the operators contained in the translated algebras Ctλ = eitPλ Be−itPλ for all t ≥ 0,
                                              ^
                                       B∞ =      Ctλ .                                 (4.2)
                                                  t≥0

Since Ctλ defines an algebra associated with a cut further to the future for larger values of
t, the limiting algebra B∞ consists of modes that never fall across the horizon, and hence
escape to the region associated with Σasy . The fact that the definitions (4.1) and (4.2) agree
justifies the statement above that the operators localized to the asymptotic regions are fixed
by the action of Pλ .
    One can further show that the algebra B∞ is preserved by the modular flow of B in a
vacuum state |Ω⟩ for Pλ , ∆−is       is
                             B B∞ ∆B = B∞ . By Takesaki’s theorem [86], this implies the
existence of a conditional expectation from B to B∞ . Recall that a conditional expectation is
a completely positive linear map E : B → B∞ such that E(b) = b for all b ∈ B∞ and satisfies
the bimodule property E(b1 ab2 ) = b1 E(a)b2 for b1 , b2 ∈ B∞ , a ∈ B [81, 87]. Takesaki’s
theorem further guarantees that the conditional expectation preserves the state ω = ⟨Ω| · |Ω⟩
on B, in the sense that ω ◦ E(b) ≡ ω(E(b)) = ω(b) for b ∈ B. It is straightforward to see
that B∞ is also preserved by the modular flow for any horizon-cut algebra Cλ , and therefore
each of these has an associated conditional expectation Eλ : Cλ → B∞ .
    Assuming B∞ is a factor, the existence of the conditional expectation Eλ implies that
                                    c       ′
B∞ and its relative commutant B∞,λ      = B∞  ∧ Cλ embed into Cλ as a tensor product, i.e.
        c   ∼         c
B∞ ⊗ B∞,λ = B∞ ∨ B∞,λ ⊂ Cλ [86]. If in fact we have equality B∞ ∨ B∞,λc
                                                                          = Cλ , the inclusion
B∞ ⊂ Cλ is called conormal [88], and along with the existence of the conditional expectation,
                                                  c
this implies that Cλ tensor factorizes B = B∞ ⊗ B∞,λ  into an algebra at infinity B∞ and its
                        c
relative commutant B∞,λ . In this case the relative commutant is naturally associated with
                               c
a nontrivial horizon algebra B∞,λ  = A(Hλ+ ), which is the setup expected for free quantum
fields. For interacting quantum fields, we do not expect a nontrivial horizon algebra, and
                                                                c
hence may conjecture that the relative commutant is trivial, B∞,λ   = C1, in which case the

                                               30
                                                              i+
                                                                               R∞

                                                         cλ
                                                                   I+
                                                                             i0
                                                b




                                                              i−




Figure 3: The Penrose diagram of the conformally extended Schwarzschild solution is shown above. The
standard maximally extended Schwarzschild solution is the region shown in yellow, and the triangular
regions in the corners are the conformal extension of the spacetime beyond I + and I − . The algebra of
massless or conformal fields in this spacetime naturally allows for smearing of the fields in the extended
regions. This motivates defining the algebra at infinity for the Schwarzschild black hole to be associated
with the region R∞ shown in purple, and this region captures the notion of outgoing quantum field
modes that never enter the black hole horizon.



inclusion B∞ ⊂ Cλ is called singular [88]. Since our discussion of the GSL generically involves
                                                                                         c
interacting matter fields but free gravitons, we will be in an intermediate case where B∞,λ  is
                                                                     c
nontrivial and describes the graviton horizon algebra, but B∞ ∨ B∞,λ ̸= Cλ since the matter
fields do not have a horizon algebra.
    This discussion indicates that the existence of the conditional expectation Eλ is a gener-
alization of the notion of a tensor factorization of the algebra Cλ . When Cλ does factorize,
                                                                                c
there is a class of tensor product states ω = ω∞ ⊗ ωH + on Cλ = B∞ ⊗ B∞,λ           that contain
                                                           λ
                                                                                              c
no correlations between the two subfactors, i.e. ω(bc) = ω(b)ω(c) for b ∈ B∞ and c ∈ B∞,λ        .
The states that are preserved by the conditional expectation, ω = ω ◦ Eλ , are product states
which satisfy Eλ (c) = ωH + (c)1 for all c ∈ B∞,λ
                                              c
                                                  . This shows that the conditional expectation
                           λ
                                                    c
Eλ encodes the information of a state ωH + on B∞,λ    , and different choices of this state result
                                            λ
in different conditional expectations from Cλ to B∞ . When the inclusion B∞ ⊂ Cλ is singular,
the conditional expectation Eλ is unique [87, Section IX.4]. In this case, there is no algebra
on which to define a horizon state ωH + , but the analog of tensor factorized states are states
                                        λ
fixed by the conditional expectation. Such states can be thought of as vacuum states for
fields localized very close to the horizon.

                                                    31
    A question that arises is why the algebra associated with the horizon is trivial in in-
teracting theories, while the algebra at infinity can remain nontrivial. For example, in the
asymptotically flat Schwarzschild black hole, both algebras appear to be associated with
operators smeared on null surfaces (Hλ+ or I + ), and so it is not immediately clear what
distinguishes the two. The resolution is that the algebra at infinity is nontrivial in interacting
theories whenever it is associated with an open region of spacetime. This is easiest to see in
the Schwarzschild-de Sitter spacetime, where the algebra at infinity consists of all operators
smeared in the region beyond the cosmological horizon, which is an open spacetime region
(see figure 2).
    For the asymptotically flat Schwarzschild spacetime, we can give a similar argument by
considering a conformal extension of the usual spacetime to include regions beyond I + , I −
into which modes propagating out to infinity enter. These are the triangular regions depicted
in figure 3 added on to the standard Penrose diagram of the Schwarzschild spacetime. This
conformal extension of Schwarzshild can be constructed by analytic continuation, in which
case the regions beyond I ± are conformal to the negative mass (or equivalently, negative r)
Schwarzschild solution [89]. This extended spacetime is similar to the conformal embedding
of Minkowski spacetime into the Einstein static universe [90], see figure 4. When dealing
with conformal matter fields, the net of algebras associated with the Schwarzschild spacetime
should naturally define a net on the extended spacetime. In this case, we see that the algebra
at infinity can be characterized by all fields smeared in the open region R∞ added beyond
I + in the conformal extension of the spacetime.8
    Figure 4 also highlights the difference between black hole spacetimes and a Rindler hori-
zon. When embedded into the Einstein static universe, the Rindler patch covers a causal
diamond whose boundary intersects I + only along a single generator. This corresponds to
the fact that only light rays propagating in the same direction parallel to the Rindler hori-
zon will remain in the Rindler patch when they intersect I + . In this case, the algebra at
infinity is trivial, since the region at infinity only consists of this single null generator along
I + . Hence, asymptotically flat black holes provide an interesting arena to study half-sided
translations with nontrivial algebras at infinity, which is not available when restricting to
quantum field theory in Minkowski space.
     As mentioned above, any algebraic state arising from an average null energy vacuum |Ω⟩
is fixed by the conditional expectation Eλ . When the algebra B∞ is nontrivial, the vacuum
|Ω⟩ is no longer unique; any other state of the form b|Ω⟩ with b ∈ B∞ is also a vacuum
state, since [Pλ , b] = 0. For any such vacuum, its modular flow maps B∞ into itself. This
suggests that the modular Hamiltonian will decompose into a component associated with B∞
and a component associated with the horizon. To describe this decomposition, we first note
that Pλ also generates an inverse half-sided translation for the commutant algebras Cλ′ , and
these similarly must contain a nontrivial translation-invariant algebra B−∞′ that is naturally

   8
    There may be pathologies associated with the existence of naked singularities in this conformal extension,
since the new region has the geometry of the negative mass Schwarzschild spacetime. It seems likely that
these can be handled with appropriate boundary conditions, the details of which do no matter for the present
discussion. It is only relevant that there is an open region beyond I + in which we can smear fields in order
to obtain a nontrivial algebra at infinity.


                                                     32
               (a) Conformal extension of Schwarzschild               (b) Conformal extension of
                                                                      Minkowski space

Figure 4: Shown above are the conformal extensions of the Schwarzschild and Minkowski spacetimes
which are asymptotically conformal to the Einstein static universe near spatial infinity i0 , which shrinks
to a point in this conformal compactification. The algebra at infinity for the Schwarzschild solution lives
in the purple region R∞ . Note that the spacetime can have pathologies such as naked singularities in the
region R∞ and singular behavior near i+ , but the figure still motivates defining a nontrivial algebra for
these regions. In the conformal extension of Minkowski space, the maroon region indicates the Rindler
wedge, and we see that the region at infinity for this patch is the single generator of I + shown in purple.
Because this is not an open region in the Einstein static universe, we do not expect an algebra at infinity
for half-sided translations associated with Rindler horizons in higher than two spacetime dimensions.


associated with the algebra at minus infinity on the left half of the black hole spacetime,
containing IL− and i−
                    L . This algebra is equivalently characterized as B−∞′ = JΩ B∞ JΩ , where
JΩ is the modular conjugation for a vacuum state |Ω⟩. Modular flow in the commutant
algebras again maps B−∞′ into itself, and there is a collection of conditional expectations
Eλ′ : Cλ′ → B−∞′ which fix the algebraic states on Cλ′ defined by the vacuum vector |Ω⟩.
    Because states fixed by a conditional expectation are the analogs of tensor factorized
states, they represent configurations in which there is no correlation between operators in
B∞ and the ingoing modes on the horizon. However, |Ω⟩ is a separating state for B∞ ,
meaning that this algebra is entangled with something. The purifying degrees of freedom
must be the complementary algebra at minus infinity, B−∞′ . Defining the two-sided algebra
at infinity as the algebraic union of these two,

                                           A∞ = B∞ ∨ B−∞′ ,                                           (4.3)

                                                    33
this discussion suggests that |Ω⟩ defines a pure state on A∞ , which, in particular, implies
that A∞ is type I. Its commutant AH = A′∞ contains operators localized to the complete
Killing horizon. Note that AH is nontrivial even in the interacting case where there is no
nontrivial horizon algebra localized to the future of a cut. At minimum, AH contains the
spectral projections of the translation generator Pλ .
     Since the modular operator hλΩ for the horizon cut algebra Cλ maps both B∞ and B−∞′
into themselves, it also maps A∞ into itself and similarly for the horizon algebra AH . As
both A∞ and AH are type I, this suggests that hλΩ generates inner automorphisms of these
algebras, meaning that it would be possible to find operators h∞ affiliated with A∞ and hλH
affiliated with AH such that
                                       hλΩ = h∞ + hλH .                                (4.4)
At present we do not have a proof of this factorization of the modular Hamiltonian, in part
due to the fact that the algebras A∞ and AH are not factors when the inclusion B∞ ⊂ Cλ has
trivial relative commutant. However, we can motivate the existence of hλH as a well-defined
operator by appealing to the free field case. In that case, the horizon cut algebra factorizes as
Cλ = CλH ⊗ B∞ , and since there is now a quantum field algebra localized to the horizon to the
future of the cut, we expect that the full horizon algebra AH becomes a factor. In this case
the modular operator factorizes between a horizon component and component at infinity,
∆Ω,λ = ∆H ,λ ∆∞ , implying that the modular Hamiltonian exhibits the decomposition (4.4).
On the other hand, hλH has an expression (3.11) in terms of the integral of the stress tensor
over the horizon, and its independent definition in terms of modular theory means that this
operator has finite fluctuations in a dense class of states, despite only being smeared on a
codimension-1 null surface. Since the two-point function of the stress tensor in an interacting
CFT takes the same form as in a free theory, we expect that hλH will have finite fluctuations
for interacting theories as well. Hence, it is plausible that the factorization (4.4) holds even
in interacting theories where the inclusion B∞ ⊂ Cλ is singular.
    An important aspect of this splitting is that any vacuum state |Ω⟩ gives rise to the
same horizon component of the modular Hamiltonian hλH . This follows from the fact that
any two such vacua |Ω1,2 ⟩ induce states on Cλ that are fixed by the conditional expectation
                                 ′
Eλ , and similarly the states ω1,2   induced on Cλ′ are fixed by the complementary conditional
                                                                   −is
expectation Eλ′ . Hence the Connes cocycle u2|1 (s) = ∆is    Ω2 ∆Ω1 |Ω2 for these two states is an
element of B∞ , and the commutant cocycle u′2|1 (s) = ∆−is           is
                                                             Ω1 |Ω2 ∆Ω1 is an element of B−∞ [87,
                                                                                             ′

                                                                       λ     λ
Chapter IX, corollary 4.22(ii)], which then implies that b := hΩ2 − hΩ1 |Ω2 is affiliated with
B∞ and b′ := hλΩ1 |Ω2 − hλΩ1 is affiliated with B−∞′ . We therefore have that
 hλΩ2 − hλΩ1 = b + b′    =⇒     hλH ,2 − hλH ,1 = b + b′ − h∞,2 + h∞,1 affiliated with A∞ . (4.5)
Thus, the difference hλH ,2 − hλH ,1 must be affiliated with the center of AH . Since the de-
composition (4.4) is ambiguous up to compensating shifts of hλH and h∞ by elements of the
center, we can consistently choose the decomposition such that hλH is the same for all vac-
uum states |Ω⟩. This point connects with the discussion of section 3.1 that the commutation
relation with Pλ uniquely fixes the modular Hamiltonian of a vacuum state up to terms that
commute with Pλ . Since h∞ is affiliated with A′H , it commutes with Pλ , and hence hλH
alone satisfies the commutation relation (3.7) associated with the half-sided translation.

                                               34
    We now apply this reasoning to the generalized second law. Given a vacuum state |Ω⟩, we
formally split the modular Hamiltonian into one-sided components hλΩ = Kλ − Kλ′ , defined
as usual as sesquilinear forms respectively affiliated with Cλ and Cλ′ . This decomposition can
be refined by performing a similar split on each of h∞ and hλH appearing in (4.4), resulting
           λ                                              λ                   ′
in Kλ = KH    + K∞ , with K∞ affiliated with B∞ and KH       affiliated with B∞ . The validity of
this decomposition only relies on the existence of the conditional expectation Eλ : Cλ → B∞ ,
and holds even in interacting theories where we cannot assume a tensor product structure
between B∞ and a horizon algebra. This decomposition of Kλ is all that is needed to apply
Wall’s argument for the GSL in setups where the algebra at infinity is nontrivial. The relative
entropy between an arbitrary state |Φ⟩ and a translation vacuum |Ω⟩ is give by
                Cλ             QFT      λ            QFT
               Srel (Φ||Ω) = −SΦ,λ + ⟨KH  + K∞ ⟩Φ + SΩ,λ
                                                    
                               QFT      Aλ         A∞                QFT
                           = −SΦ,λ −         +           + ⟨K∞ ⟩Φ + SΩ,λ                    (4.6)
                                       4GN Φ      4GN Φ

                                                  λ
applying the identity (3.32) and the fact that KH    continues to be given by the stress ten-
             2π +
sor integral κ Hζλ appearing in that relation. When considering relative entropy differences
between two horizon cuts, the last three terms in (4.6) will cancel since the vacuum entangle-
                                                                        A∞
ment entropy is independent of the horizon cut and because K∞ and 4G      N
                                                                            are forms affiliated
with the algebra at infinity whose expectation values are the same in the state |Φ⟩ for any
value of λ. Monotonicity of relative entropy again reduces to the GSL for this setup.
    One interesting aspect of this discussion is that we can employ any vacuum state |Ω⟩
when applying monotonicity of relative entropy in (4.6). This independence of the choice of
vacuum can be made more explicit by invoking an identity satisfied by the relative entropy
in the presence of a conditional expectation [81, 91–93]. Using the notation ω = ⟨Ω| · |Ω⟩,
φ = ⟨Φ| · |Φ⟩ as states on Cλ , and recalling ω = ω ◦ Eλ , the identity reads
                                                     
                      Cλ            B∞                    Cλ
                     Srel (φ||ω) = Srel   φ|B∞    ω|B∞ + Srel (φ||φ ◦ Eλ ).                 (4.7)

The first term on the right involves the relative entropy of the two states restricted to B∞ ,
and hence is the same when computed for two different horizon cuts. Monotonicity of the
                                                                             Cλ
relative entropy on the left between horizon cuts therefore implies that Srel   (φ||φ ◦ Eλ ) is
also monotonic. Since this relative entropy only refers to the state φ and the conditional
expectation Eλ , it is manifestly independent of the choice of vacuum state ω. In terms of
entropies, it can be expressed as
                  Cλ                   QFT            Φ       QFT
                 Srel (φ||φ ◦ Eλ ) = −SΦ,λ + ⟨KH + + K∞ ⟩Φ + Sφ◦E
                                                λ
                                                             λ
                                       QFT      A λ        A∞        QFT
                                   = −SΦ,λ −          +           + Sφ◦E                    (4.8)
                                               4GN Φ      4GN Φ         λ



              Φ
using that ⟨K∞  ⟩Φ = 0 and applying (3.32). Since φ ◦ Eλ is a vacuum state, the entropy
  QFT
Sφ◦Eλ is independent of the cut λ, and since the expectation value of A∞ is also independent
                             Cλ
of the cut, monotonicity of Srel (φ||φ ◦ Eλ ) again implies the GSL.

                                                 35
4.2     Gravitational algebra

The discussion up to this point has been at the level of relative entropies in quantum field
theory. We now describe how to incorporate the gravitational constraints to arrive at a semi-
classical second law for a gravitational algebra that incorporates asymptotic charges. We
will specialize to asymptotically flat spacetimes with massless matter fields in this section,
but it should be clear that similar arguments apply to other asymptotics such as cosmo-
logical black holes. As emphasized by KFLS [32], because the null Cauchy surface for our
subregion naturally splits into a component on the black hole horizon Hλ+ and a compo-
nent associated with I + , the gravitational constraints similarly decompose into independent
constraints on each component of the Cauchy surface. This allows for a construction of the
gravitational algebra in steps by introducing individual asymptotic charges associated with
each constraint and constructing the crossed product algebras. Following this, there is an
additional constraint arising from matching conditions where the two Cauchy surfaces meet
(i.e. across i+ in the asymptotically flat case). The matching conditions determine some of
the gravitational charges in terms of other quantities, so that the final algebra contains only
asymptotic charges at spatial infinity. We describe the details of this procedure below, and
then demonstrate it explicitly for an asymptotically flat Schwarzschild black hole.
    In order to keep the discussion as general as possible, it is convenient to assume that
the constraints have already been imposed on the algebra at infinity, so that B∞ already
incorporates asymptotic charges associated with I + such as the ADM mass or late-time
Bondi mass. We will assume that this results in a semifinite algebra, meaning that B∞ is
type I or type II and possesses a normal, faithful, semifinite trace, which we denote Tr∞ . We
also expect B∞ to be properly infinite (i.e. type I∞ or type II∞ ), meaning that Tr∞ 1 = ∞,
so Tr∞ does not define a normalizable state. Instead, Tr∞ is a normal, faithful, semifinite
weight, which still has a well-defined modular theory associated with it [87, Chapter VIII].
We continue to assume that B∞ is the translation-invariant algebra of the horizon cut algebra
Cλ (which remains type III1 ), and hence we can define a weight on Cλ by composing Tr∞
with the conditional expectation Eλ ,

                                            ωTr := Tr∞ ◦Eλ .                                          (4.9)

The modular flow for ωTr reproduces the modular flow associated with Tr∞ on operators
in B∞ , which is trivial. Hence, B∞ is the centralizer of this modular flow, meaning that
these operators commute with the modular Hamiltonian hλTr for this weight.9 Using the
decomposition (4.4), valid for modular Hamiltonians of weights fixed by Eλ , we find that
hTr,∞ = 0 and hence hλTr = hλH , which is uniquely determined by the conditional expectation
Eλ . Hence when B∞ is semifinite, the geometric flow generated by hλH which fixes points on
I + and acts like a boost around the horizon cut is the modular flow of a weight defined on
Cλ .
   9
    To define hλTr as an operator on the full Hilbert space, we must also specify a weight for the commutant
algebra Cλ′ , which we can define using the trace Tr−∞ on B−∞′ and the complementary conditional expecta-
tion Eλ′ : Cλ → B−∞′ . Given such a pair of weights, we can always find a Hamiltonian hλTr which generates
modular flow on Cλ and backwards modular flow in Cλ′ [45, Lemma 5.11].


                                                    36
    The procedure for imposing the gravitational constraints is now exactly the same as in
section 3.3. We introduce the additional asymptotic charge
                                                        (2)
                                                    A∞
                                             ŷ = −                                       (4.10)
                                                    4GN
acting on a Hilbert space Hasy = L2 (Ry ), and determine the operators that commute with
the gravitational constraint associated with the boost diffeomorphism which hλH generates.
When represented on H  e=H  b ⊗ Hasy , where H  b includes the QFT Hilbert space as well as the
Hilbert space for asymptotic charges in B∞ , these operators form a crossed product algebra
                           D λ           λ
                                               E                        d
                     Ceλ = eik̂hH ae−ik̂hH , ŷ ,      a ∈ Cλ , k̂ = −i .                (4.11)
                                                                       dy
Because hλH is the modular Hamiltonian of the weight ωTr , Ceλ is the crossed product of a
type III1 quantum field theory algebra by a modular automorphism group, and hence is type
II∞ and possesses a trace.
    Ceλ is not the final gravitational algebra associated with the exterior of the cut since
we still need to impose the constraint coming from the matching condition at i+ . This
condition arises because the Hilbert space H e contains two operators that measure the time
           +              −
shift at i relative to iL in the complementary region. One of these is the operator k̂
appearing in the crossed product, which is conjugate to the asymptotic area operator ŷ
which generates forward time evolution along the horizon. This gives k̂ the interpretation
of a renormalized Killing time difference between i−    L and the cut of Hλ in the distant
                                                                            +

future where one matches the horizon to a spacelike hypersurface connecting it to I + . The
second time operator is associated with time translations along I + . We suppose that B∞
contains an energy operator x̂ generating forward time evolution along I + , which, due to
the semiclassical assumptions has a continuous spectrum and is unbounded above and below.
It therefore possesses a conjugate time operator which we denote p̂ which measures the time
shift between i−L and the cut of I
                                    +
                                      where one matches the Cauchy surface connecting it to
the black hole horizon. Since these two notions of time shift must agree, we arrive at the
final matching constraint
                                      Cmatch = k̂ − p̂ = 0.                           (4.12)

   To impose this constraint on the algebra, we first look for operators in Ceλ that commute
with k̂ − p̂. This subalgebra                 D       E′
                                     0
                                   C = Cλ ∧ k̂ − p̂
                                    e
                                       λ
                                         e                                              (4.13)

of Ceλ is isomorphic to the desired gravitational algebra, but represented on a Hilbert space
that contains other operators that do not preserve the constraint (4.12) . We can remedy this
by passing to a Hilbert space of coinvariants, following the procedure outlined by CLPW [31].
This Hilbert space is a quotient of He obtained by identifying vectors that differ by a state in
the image of k̂ − p̂, so that |Ω⟩ ∼ |Ω⟩ + (k̂ − p̂)|χ⟩. Passing to this space of coinvariants can
be used to eliminate the factor of Hasy from the Hilbert space, so that the physical Hilbert
space is identified with H.b This identification is achieved by defining the operator

                                           V := ⟨0k |e−iŷp̂ ,                            (4.14)

                                                  37
which maps H e to H,
                   b and annihilates states of the form (k̂ − p̂)|χ⟩. This allows us to map
any operator in c0 ∈ Ceλ0 to an operator bc acting on H
                                                      b by the relation

                                                   V c0 = bcV.                                              (4.15)

The algebra in B(H)
                 b generated by all such bc is the final result for the gravitational algebra
Cbλ .10
    A subtlety arises at this point regarding the existence of a trace on Cbλ . The issue is
that the trace defined on Ceλ is a semifinite weight, meaning it assigns infinite values to some
operators in Ceλ , although it is finite on sufficiently many operators that they generate the
full algebra. There is no guarantee that the trace defines a semifinite weight when restricted
to a subalgebra, since the subalgebra may consist mostly of operators with infinite trace.
Hence, we need to separately analyze whether Cbλ admits a trace. We will describe here a set
of sufficient conditions that ensure this is the case.
   Since p̂ generates an automorphism of B∞ , we can assume that this algebra takes the
form of a crossed product B∞ = B∞0 ⋊R, where B 0 is the subalgebra of operators commuting
                                                ∞
                       ′
          0 = B ∧ ⟨p̂⟩ . Denoting H                                               0
with p̂, B∞     ∞                   ∞ as the generator of the automorphism on B∞ for this
crossed product, the algebra B∞ is takes the form
                                                                  0 ∼ 0
                      B∞ = eip̂H∞ be−ip̂H∞ , x̂ ,            b ∈ B∞ = B∞ ,        [x̂, p̂] = i.             (4.16)
                   0
The algebra B∞        simply consists of quantum field theory operators without the dressing
          ip̂H∞      −ip̂H∞
factors e       (·)e        . The full horizon cut algebra also takes the form of a crossed product:
             0              ′
defining Cλ = Cλ ∧ ⟨p̂⟩ , we find that

                               Cλ = eip̂H∞ ce−ip̂H∞ , x̂ ,          c ∈ Cλ0 ∼
                                                                            = Cλ0 .                         (4.17)

The unconstrained gravitational algebra Ceλ then is a crossed product of Cλ0 by R2 ,
                        D λ                                  E
                           ik̂hH ip̂H∞ −ip̂H∞ −ik̂hλ
                   Cλ = e
                   e            e     ce      e    H , x̂, ŷ ,  c ∈ Cλ0 ,                                  (4.18)

and when imposing the matching constraint (4.12), we find that only the combination x̂ + ŷ
remains in the final gravitational algebra. The relation (4.15) then maps x̂ + ŷ to x̂ when
representing this algebra on H,
                              b so that the final gravitational algebra is just a single crossed
product by the combined automorphism generated by hλH + H∞ ,
                            D      λ               λ
                                                               E
                       Cbλ = eip̂(hH +H∞ ) ce−ip̂(hH +H∞ ) , x̂ , c ∈ Cλ0 .               (4.19)


   We can now characterize the status of the trace on Cbλ in terms of properties of the
                                    0
automorphism that H∞ generates on B∞  . The first case to consider is when p̂ generates an
  10
    V is not bounded when viewed as an operator acting on H,        e and is singular even as an unbounded operator
since V V † = ⟨0k |e−iŷp̂ eiŷp̂ |0k ⟩ = ∞. One interpretation of V is to view it as determining an operator-valued
weight T from operators in Ceλ to operators in Cbλ via T (c̃) = V c̃V † (see section 6 for the definition of
operator-valued weights). Equation (4.15) then corresponds to the bimodule property of the operator-valued
weight. It is interesting that the BRST procedure described by CLPW [31] has an interpretation in terms
of operator-valued weights.


                                                        38
automorphism that preserves the trace on B∞ , and the dual automorphism generated by H∞
on B∞ 0
        is inner. An example of this case would be the algebra defined at I − when working
                                                                                        0
with the Unruh state for a black hole, as considered in [32], where the analog of B∞       is type
                     0
I∞ . In this case, B∞ is itself semifinite and possesses a trace, so modular flow on this algebra
                                                               0
is inner. Since H∞ generates an inner automorphism of B∞         , by the converse of the cocycle
derivative theorem [87, Theorem VIII.3.8], it must be the modular Hamiltonian h∞ of some
                       0
weight defined on B∞     . Pulling back this weight by the conditional expectation Eλ , this leads
to a weight on Cλ whose modular Hamiltonian is hλH + h∞ , and therefore Cbλ is a modular
                   0

crossed product of the type III1 algebra Cλ0 , and hence possesses a trace.
   The second case is when the automorphism generated by p̂ rescales the trace on B∞ .
An example of this case, considered below, is the Schwarzschild black hole in the Hartle-
Hawking state. In this case, we can apply the general structure theorem for type III von
                                                                      0
Neumann algebras [87, Theorem XII.1.1] to conclude, assuming both B∞    and B∞ are factors,
       0                                                                  0
that B∞ is type III1 and H∞ generates modular flow of some weight on B∞     , whose modular
Hamiltonian we denote h∞ . So once again by composing this weight with the conditional
expectation Eλ , we obtain a weight on Cλ0 whose modular Hamiltonian is hλH + h∞ . Again,
the gravitational algebra Cbλ is a modular crossed product which possesses a trace.
    Finally, if p̂ preserves the trace on B∞ , but H∞ generates an outer automorphism on
  0                                       0
B∞ , then it is possible to show that B∞    is already semifinite. However, the outerness of
                                                                                         0
the automorphism generated by H∞ shows that it is not a modular Hamiltonian for B∞         , in
                         λ             0
which case neither is hH + H∞ for Cλ . This is enough to conclude that Cλ is not semifinite.
                                                                          b
                                                                      0
This case might arise if H∞ were a different symmetry generator of B∞   , such as rotation. In
such situations, there are additional gravitational charges that should be added such as the
ADM angular momentum, and by incorporating the associated constraints one may be able
to argue that the final gravitational algebra is semifinite. An example where these additional
constraints are important is for rotating black holes, such as the Kerr example considered
in [32].
    We conclude this section by applying the general construction to the example of a
Schwarzschild black hole. In this case, there is a natural vacuum state |Ω⟩ provided by
the Hartle-Hawking state [94]. The horizon cut algebra Cλ0 consists of all quantum fields to
the exterior of the cut v = λ(y A ), and possesses a subalgebra B∞     0
                                                                         of quantum fields that
propagate out through I . Since |Ω⟩ is a vacuum state for the horizon average null energy
                          +
                                                     0
Pλ which generates a half-sided translation and B∞      is the translation-invariant algebra, the
modular Hamiltonian for |Ω⟩ splits into a sum of two pieces, hλΩ = hλH + h∞ , where hλH is
given, as usual, as an integral of the stress tensor over the horizon (3.11). The component
h∞ affiliated with the algebra at infinity is independent of the choice of horizon cut, and
therefore can be identified by taking the cut to lie on the bifurcation surface, λ = 0. In
this case, the modular Hamiltonian is the generator of the global time-translation symmetry
associated with the Killing vector ξ a . In general, this generator will be given by an integral
over a complete Cauchy surface Σ in the global spacetime,

                                                Z
                                           2π
                                    hΩ = −           T ab ξ b ϵa... ,                      (4.20)
                                            κ    Σ

                                                39
and it is independent of the choice of Cauchy surface since it is the generator of a symmetry.
Choosing the Cauchy surface to lie on the horizon and asymptotic infinity Σ = H ∪I + ∪IL−
(and assuming massless fields so that contributions from i+ , i−     L can be neglected), we see that
h∞ is a local integral of the stress tensor over just I + and IL− ,
                                             Z
                                          2π
                                 h∞ = −               T a ξ b ϵa... .                          (4.21)
                                           κ I + ∪IL− b

This reflects the fact that the state of the fields at I + in the Hartle-Hawking state is thermal
                                        κ
at the Hawking temperature TH = 2π        . This modular Hamiltonian includes a contribution
from gravitons, which is quadratic in the Bondi news tensor at I + , IL− [95–97].
    To carry out the first step in the construction of the gravitational algebra, we must add
                                         0
the appropriate asymptotic charges to B∞    and impose constraints to end up with a semifinite
algebra. The asymptotic charge is given by the difference between the ADM mass MADM
defined at i0 and the late time Bondi mass M+ defined at i+ . The constraint that relates
these operators to the quantum fields is the Bondi mass loss formula [95–101],
                                               2π
                              C I + = K∞ +        (M+ − MADM ) = 0,                           (4.22)
                                                κ
where K∞ involves only the component of h∞ affiliated with I + ,
                                         Z
                                      2π
                              K∞ = −          T a ξ b ϵa... .                                 (4.23)
                                       κ I+ b
There is a similar constraint involving operators in the complementary algebra at infinity at
IL− , the left ADM mass MADM L
                                 , and the left early time Bondi mass M−L at i−  L , which reads
                                                                  Z
                          2π                                   2π
        CI − = −K−∞′ −       (M−L − MADML
                                            ) = 0,      K−∞′ =        T a ξ b ϵa... .      (4.24)
           L               κ                                    κ IL− b

    When imposing these constraints on the algebra, it is necessary to consider the sum of
these two constraints C∞ = CI + + CI − , due to the appearance of K∞ and K−∞′ in the
                                               0
individual constraints (4.22), (4.24). Since B∞   is an algebra of quantum fields in a thermal
state, the one-sided Hamiltonians K∞ , K−∞′ are only defined as sesquilinear forms due to
infinite thermal fluctuations. However, the combination appearing C∞ is K∞ − K−∞′ = h∞ ,
which is a well-defined operator generating a strongly continuous flow and therefore amenable
to constructing a crossed product algebra. Carrying out the general procedure outlined in
sections 2 and 3.3 and references [31,33] for imposing the constraint, the resulting semifinite
algebra B∞ is the crossed product
                                                                 2π
                 B∞ = eip̂h∞ be−ip̂h∞ , x̂ ,        0
                                               b ∈ B∞ ,   x̂ =      (M+ − MADM ).             (4.25)
                                                                  κ
                                          0
Since h∞ generates modular flow on B∞       , this algebra is a modular crossed product and
therefore possesses a trace. The algebra Cλ that includes B∞ as a subalgebra is defined
exactly as in equation (4.17), which is a type III1 algebra admitting a half-sided translation
with B∞ as the translation-invariant subalgebra.

                                                 40
   We next impose the horizon constraint by including the asymptotic area operator
                                                     A∞
                                            ŷ = −       ,                              (4.26)
                                                     4GN

and forming the crossed product of Cλ by the horizon modular flow generator hλH , just as
in section 3.3. This leads to the double crossed product algebra Ceλ defined in equation
(4.18). We then impose the matching constraint (4.12) by determining the subalgebra that
commutes with k̂ − p̂. The only asymptotic charge that survives this constraint is the sum
                                          2π        2π      A∞
                            x̂ + ŷ = −      MADM +    M+ −     .                       (4.27)
                                           κ         κ      4GN
Furthermore, since we have assumed only massless fields, there is no stress energy flux
through i+ , which implies a further condition on the gravitational charges [32],
                                          A∞    2π
                                              =    M+ ,                                 (4.28)
                                          4GN    κ
so that these terms cancel in (4.27). Therefore, the only asymptotic charge in the final
gravitational algebra is the ADM mass. After representing this algebra on a Hilbert space
of coinvariants, which we can take to be HQFT ⊗ L2 (R) as described above, the resulting
algebra is
                  D
                    ip̂(hλ +h∞ ) −ip̂(hλ +h∞ )
                                                   E                  2π
            Cλ = e
            b            H      ce     H       , x̂ , c ∈ Cλ0 , x̂ = − MADM .      (4.29)
                                                                       κ
One confirms that this final algebra possesses a trace because it is simply the modular crossed
product of Cλ0 , since hλH + h∞ is the horizon-cut modular Hamiltonian of the Hartle-Hawking
state.
     The generalized second law for these horizon cut algebras now follows in a similar manner
as in section 3.3. We consider semiclassical states |Φ⟩b = |Φ, f ⟩ with the wavefunction for
                   f′
x̂ slowly varying, f ∼ O(ε). Applying formula (2.14), the semiclassical expansion for the
entropy of the algebra Cbλ in this state is given by
                                    C0
                       S(ρλΦb ) = −Srelλ (Φ||Ω) − ⟨x̂⟩Φb + SfMADM + O(ε2 ).             (4.30)

This can again be converted into an expression involving the generalized entropy of the
                                                                             C0
horizon cut by writing the relative entropy as the modular free energy Srelλ (Φ||Ω) = ⟨K∞ +
  λ        QFT
KH   ⟩Φ −SΦ,λ  and applying the constraints (4.22), (4.28), and (3.32). Since the same formula
applies for the entropy of the algebra for a later cut λ̃ in the same state |Φ⟩,
                                                                             b and since ⟨x̂⟩ b
                                                                                             Φ
and SfMADM remain unchanged, the entropy difference between the two cuts reduces to a
difference of relative entropies,
                                               C0            C0
                       S(ρλ̃ ) − S(ρλ ) = −Srelλ̃ (Φ||Ω) + Srelλ (Φ||Ω) ≥ 0,            (4.31)

up to O(ε2 ) corrections.

                                                41
    Interestingly, a stronger statement of the generalized second law can be proven for overall
differences in entropy between the horizon cut λ and the entropy at very late times. As
discussed above, Cbλ is a crossed product of a quantum field algebra Cλ0 which admits a half-
sided translation. The state in which the crossed product is defined is fixed by the conditional
                                                                       0
expectation Eλ that sends Cλ to the translation-invariant algebra B∞     . Modular flow in this
                    0
state then maps B∞ to itself, and hence there is a subalgebra of Cλ isomorphic to the crossed
                                                                    b
              0
product of B∞   ,
                                  B∞ = eip̂h∞ be−ip̂h∞ , x̂ ⊂ Cbλ .                       (4.32)
Because modular flow commutes with the conditional expectation Eλ , the gravitational al-
gebra Cbλ admits a conditional expectation to B∞ , denoted E         bλ , which acts on operators as
                                                         
                 Ebλ eip̂(hλH +h∞ ) ce−ip̂(hλH +h∞ ) eiux̂ = eip̂h∞ Eλ (c)e−ip̂h∞ eiux̂ .       (4.33)

The formula for the trace on either algebra Cbλ or B∞ is the same, given by
                                  Tr(·) = 2π⟨Ω, 0p |e−x̂ (·)|Ω, 0p ⟩,                          (4.34)
and hence Tr∞ = Trλ|∞ . Because the inclusion B∞ ⊂ Cbλ is trace-preserving, we are in a
position to apply the results of [102], which imply that the entropy on B∞ is larger than
the entropy on Cλ for any state |Φ⟩,
                                 b with no semiclassical assumption on the wavefunction.
Hence we arrive at the global second law,
                                          S(ρ∞
                                             Φ
                                                      λ
                                             b ) ≥ S(ρΦ
                                                      b ).                                     (4.35)
This is similar to the global second law discussed in [30], except that it now involves a large
algebra at infinity B∞ that consists of more than just the asymptotic charges. We also note
that the conditional expectation E    bλ preserves the trace Trλ = Tr∞ ◦E
                                                                        bλ , but we expect that
the index of this inclusion is infinite. Hence, the upper bound on the entropy increase derived
in [102] is simply infinite, and does not yield an interesting constraint.
    As a final comment, we mention that a double crossed product algebra similar to Ceλ
defined in (4.18) appears in the construction of the algebra for Schwarzschild-de Sitter by
KFLS [32]. In this construction, there is an additional degree of freedom included in the
algebra that describes an observer eternally restricted to the regions between the black hole
and cosmological horizons. The observer’s energy therefore contributes to the flux through i−
so that the analog of the matching condition (4.28) is modified by the observer’s Hamiltonian,
which is then related to the sum of the two early time horizon area fluctuations. The presence
of such an observer also allows the matching condition (4.12) for the two horizon times to
not be imposed, so that the final double crossed product algebra is the correct description
in this case. However, it is also natural to ask whether the observer degree of freedom can
be eliminated in this setup. This is done precisely by setting the observer Hamiltonian to
zero, and imposing the matching constraint (4.12). The resulting algebra is a single crossed
product, and semifiniteness follows from the arguments discussed above. In this description,
the early time black hole horizon area replaces the observer Hamiltonian as the asymptotic
gravitational charge, so that the black hole itself plays the role of the observer in de Sitter
space. This setup is quite analogous to the model of an observer in holography as a small
black hole, considered in [103, 104].

                                                  42
4.3     Rotating black holes and Unruh states

The discussion of section 4.2 aims to be sufficiently general so as to provide a construction
of semifinite gravitational algebras for generic black holes with a variety of asymptotics and
angular velocities. However, a number of subtleties arise when carrying out the details of the
construction for more complicated cases than the Schwarzschild black hole. In this section,
we describe two such subtleties in applying the procedure in the physically relevant contexts
of rotating black holes and black holes formed from collapse. We conjecture how these
subtleties should be resolved, but do not perform an in-depth analysis, which we leave as an
interesting topic for future investigation.
    For rotating asymptotically flat black holes such as the Kerr solution or Myers-Perry
black holes in d ≥ 5 [105], the main issue is that the horizon-generating Killing vector ξ a
is not timelike throughout the black hole exterior. In general, the Killing vector has the
decomposition [106]                            X
                                    ξ a = ta +   ΩiH ϕai ,                           (4.36)
                                                       i

where t is the Killing vector associated with asymptotic time translations, ϕai are a collection
        a

of rotational Killing vectors, and ΩiH are the horizon rotational velocities. Since the norms
of ϕai grow at large radius while the norm of ta remains bounded, the vector ξ a eventually
becomes spacelike as long as there is at least one nonzero ΩiH . There are therefore operators
localized in the region that ξ a is spacelike that carry negative Killing energy. The existence
of negative energy states created by these operators is closely tied to the phenomenon of
superradiance for rotating black holes [107, 108].
    Negative Killing energy states pose a problem for constructing a thermal state, since
a thermal density matrix ρ ∝ e−βHξ is not normalizable when the spectrum of Hξ is not
bounded below. This appears to preclude the existence of a global vacuum state |Ω⟩ that
satisfies a KMS condition with respect to the Killing flow, meaning there is no analog of the
Hartle-Hawking state for the Kerr black hole whose modular Hamiltonian globally generates a
geometric flow [109].11 This does not pose an immediate issue to the semiclassical generalized
second law discussed in section 4.1. There, we only required that there is a vacuum state
|Ω⟩ for the horizon average null energy operators Pλ , since any such state has a modular
Hamiltonian whose horizon component hλH is given by an integral of the stress tensor (3.11).
The behavior of the modular flow of |Ω⟩ on the algebra at infinity B∞ does not affect the
derivation of the generalized second law in this context.
    The actual problem arises when attempting to construct a semifinite gravitational algebra
following the procedure of section 4.2. In this case, we would like to argue that imposing
the gravitational constraints on the algebra at infinity results in an algebra with a trace;
however, this is tantamount to assuming that there is a state ω∞ on B∞ whose modular
flow generates time translations along the vector ta at I + . One possibility is that such a
state does exist, and one would further need to argue that it is thermal at the Hawking
  11
    Relatedly, one can show that for any state whose modular flow is globally geometric, the flow must be
timelike throughout the spacetime region associated with the algebra [110]. Interestingly, the restriction to
timelike flows does not appear to apply to proper weights, discussed below.


                                                     43
temperature. Assuming this is possible, this state could be extended to a state on any of
the horizon cut algebras by composing it with the conditional expectation Eλ , and then
ωλ = ω∞ ◦ Eλ would be a horizon vacuum state. For rotating black holes, the modular
flow for this state would be geometric only for operators on the horizon and on I + , since it
flows along different Killing vectors on these two surfaces (respectively, ξ a and ta ). Assuming
that one can argue that this state is Hadamard throughout the two-sided Kerr geometry,
this would provide the necessary state to construct a semifinite gravitational algebra. One
would also need to considered modified matching conditions for the gravitational charges
and incorporate additional crossed products for rotations, along the lines of KFLS [32], due
to the fact that the constraints are associated with different Killing vectors and therefore
different asymptotic charges.
    Another possibility is to try to work directly with the analog of the Hartle-Hawking state,
which in the case of Kerr is given by the Frolov-Thorne vacuum, which has the appropriate
thermal behavior for operators near the horizon where ξ a is timelike [111]. However, this
vacuum cannot lead to a well-defined state everywhere in the Kerr exterior, due to issues
related to superradiance discussed above. This manifests in a failure of the Hadamard
property for correlation functions in the region where ξ a is spacelike. If one were to treat the
Frolov-Thorne vacuum as a normalizable state, it would produce a unitarily inequivalent GNS
representation of the local field algebra relative to a state that was Hadamard everywhere
in the Kerr exterior. Such a representation would be irrelevant for investigations of the
generalized second law for the Kerr black hole. However, it is possible that by reinterpreting
the Frolov-Thorne vacuum as a nonnormalizable weight as opposed to a state, it could
provide the appropriate modular operator to construct a trace on the algebra at infinity.
    Recall that a weight on a von Neumman algebra is a positive linear function from positive
                                                        b = R+ ∪{+∞} [87, Chapter VII]. The
operators in the algebra to the extended positive reals R
weight is said to be semifinite if the weak closure of the algebra generated by the operators
with finite expectation value in the weight gives back the full von Neumann algebra. Since
the Frolov-Thorne vacuum assigns finite expectation values to operators in the region where
ξ a is timelike, we can interpret it as a weight on the algebra. Furthermore, the causal
completion of this region in spacetime yields back the entire exterior wedge of the Kerr black
hole, so it is plausible that the subalgebra of operators with finite expectation value in the
Frolov-Thorne vacuum is weakly dense in the full von Neumann algebra of the black hole
exterior. If this is the case, the Frolov-Thorne vacuum would define a semifinite weight on
this algebra. The modular operator for this weight would presumably generate the Killing
flow of ξ a , and hence by implementing the crossed product of this flow on the algebra at
infinity, one would obtain an algebra with a trace. While an intriguing proposal, there are
many details to check in order to establish the proposed properties of the Frolov-Thorne
vacuum as a semifinite weight. A few of these issues are discussed in section 7.
   A second set of questions arises when applying the arguments for the generalized second
law to black holes formed from collapse, whose natural vacuum state is the Unruh state [112,
113] as opposed to the Hartle-Hawking state. The Unruh vacuum is defined by initial data
on the past black hole horizon and I − , and imposes that there is no incoming radiation from
past infinity. By contrast, the Hartle-Hawking state has incoming thermal radiation from


                                               44
I − in addition to outgoing Hawking radiation at I + , which is an unnatural idealization for
astrophysical black holes; such a boundary condition is more appropriate for an eternal black
hole. The question therefore arises to what extent the Unruh state describing an evaporating
black hole is covered by the analysis in the present paper which relied on properties of the
Hartle-Hawking vacuum.
    At first glance it appears that the Unruh state can just be considered a specific excited
state for the algebra of quantum fields exterior to a cut of the horizon. It would then describe
a state with some amount of entanglement between modes that enter the horizon and modes
in B∞ that escape through I + , and therefore satisfies a generalized second law according to
the discussion of section 4.1. The main issue with this argument is that the Unruh vacuum
differs significantly from the Hartle-Hawking vacuum in the infrared, so that in standard
treatments these states result in unitarily inequivalent representations of the field algebras
in the black hole exterior. This results in a failure in the Hadamard property at the past
black hole horizon in the maximally extended spacetime, leading to a divergence in the
average null energy operators Pλ coming from contributions near the bifurcation surface.
    As in the discussion of the Frolov-Thorne vacuum, the resolution here may involve rein-
terpreting the states under consideration instead as weights on a single representation of the
field algebra. If we take the perspective that the Unruh vacuum is the appropriate state for
black holes formed from collapse, this would then require interpreting the Hartle-Hawking
vacuum as a weight on the von Neumann algebra constructed from the GNS representation
of the field algebra in the Unruh state. Fortunately, the structure theorems of half-sided
translations and modular inclusions generalize to the case of normal semifinite weights [114],
so assuming the Hartle-Hawking vacuum still defines a weight fixed by the translation, these
theorems would continue to allow the derivation of the modular Hamiltonian as a stress
tensor integral as in sections 3.1 and 4.1. One possible subtlety in applying the general
discussion of section 4.1 is that when the translation-invariant weight is not normalizable,
there may no longer be a conditional expectation to the translation-invariant algebra at in-
finity. A natural conjecture generalizing the results of [85] is that instead, one would find an
operator-valued weight to the algebra at infinity. This would likely still allow the discussion
of section 4.1 to go through, and would still allow the construction of a gravitational alge-
bra following the procedure of section 4.2. Verifying the details of these conjectures is an
important direction for future work.



5    Perturbative corrections to crossed product entropy

In section 3.3, we found that the crossed product entropies satisfy a generalized second law
to leading order in the semiclassical expansion for states of the form |Φ⟩ b = |Φ, f ⟩. This
raises the question of whether these entropies continue to be monotonic after accounting for
corrections in the semiclassical expansion. In this section we begin to address this question.
We derive the exact expression for the correction to the semiclassical entropy in the crossed
product algebra, and work out some of its main properties. One of these properties is that
the correction is strictly nonnegative, which follows from the interpretation of the classical-

                                              45
quantum state as a Petz recovery of the quantum field state |Φ⟩. We can also obtain an upper
bound on the entropy correction using the explicit expression for the entropy correction.
Although we are not able to use these bounds to conclude anything about the corrected
generalized second law, which relies on differences in entropy corrections, we note that these
bounds were recently employed in [115] to obtain rigorous proofs of the Bekenstein bound
and quantum null energy condition in terms of vacuum-subtracted entropies. These bounds
indicate that it is difficult to violate the generalized second law with semiclassical corrections,
although it remains possible that such a violation could occur over short time scales in regimes
where the quantum field relative entropy is nearly constant. We leave open the question of
whether the GSL holds at all times for the crossed product entropies, but note that if
it did hold, it would represent a novel data-processing inequality bounding the decrease
of relative entropy for quantum fields. It would therefore be interesting to connect this
proposed bound to the improved data-processing inequalities employed in universal recovery
channels [116–118].
    We begin by explaining the interpretation of the state |Φ, f ⟩ as a Petz-recovered state,
which leads to the lower bound on the entropy correction. Given a state φ for a von Neumann
                                  1
algebra A, we denote by |φ 2 ⟩ its canonical purification in the natural cone defined by a
vacuum state |Ω⟩ in a standard representation of A. We consider a unital, completely
positive (UCP) map α : B → A between von Neumann algebras, and look to construct the
associated Petz recovery map associated with a cyclic-separating state φ on A. We first
define the φ-dual map α′ , which is a UCP map on the commutants αφ′ : A′ → B ′ defined by
the relation
            D         1                    1
                                             E D 1           1
                                                               E
              (φ ◦ α) 2 αφ′ (a′ )b (φ ◦ α) 2 = φ 2 a′ α(b) φ 2 ,   a′ ∈ A′ , b ∈ B.     (5.1)

By combining α′ with the modular conjugations JA , JB , we obtain a new UCP map αφP :
A → B called the Petz map [81, 119, 120], defined by

                                αφP (a) = JB αφ′ JA aJA JB .
                                                       
                                                                                (5.2)

   We now apply this to the crossed product algebra

                                     Ab = eip̂hΩ ae−ip̂hΩ , q̂ ,                             (5.3)

where a ∈ A are operators in a QFT algebra of interest, and |Ω⟩ is a cyclic-separating vacuum
state whose modular Hamiltonian hΩ defines the crossed product. The inclusion map

                                       ι(a) = eip̂hΩ ae−ip̂hΩ                                (5.4)

defines a UCP map from the QFT subalgebra A into the crossed product A,         b and hence
we would like to construct its Petz map. We consider the vacuum state |Ω⟩   b = |Ω, f ⟩ with
wavefunction f chosen to be real and positive. This ensures that |Ω⟩  b is cyclic-separating
for A,
     b and reality of f implies that |Ω⟩
                                       b is in the canonical cone of the tracial weight Tr =
           −q̂
2π⟨Ω, 0p |e · |Ω, 0p ⟩, and hence has the modular conjugation (see equation (2.8))

                                         JAb = JΩ e−ip̂hΩ .                                  (5.5)

                                                 46
States of this form pull back to the vacuum state |Ω⟩ under the action of the dual channel
ι∗ , meaning that (ωΩb ◦ ι)(a) = ⟨Ω|ι(a)|
                                  b       b = ⟨Ω|a|Ω⟩.
                                         Ω⟩
    We denote ωΩb -dual map by ι′f : Ab′ → A′ , which acts as

 ⟨Ω|ι′f (b
         a′ )a|Ω⟩ = ⟨Ω, f |b
                           a′ ι(a)|Ω, f ⟩ = ⟨Ω, f |b
                                                   a′ eip̂hΩ ae−ip̂hΩ |Ω, f ⟩ = ⟨Ω|⟨f |e−ip̂hΩ b
                                                                                               a′ eip̂hΩ |f ⟩a|Ω⟩.
                                                                                                              (5.6)
                                           ′
This determines the expression for ιf to be

                                          ι′f (b
                                               a′ ) = ⟨f |e−ip̂hΩ b
                                                                  a′ eip̂hΩ |f ⟩.                            (5.7)

Combining this with the expression (5.5) for the modular conjugation, we find that the Petz
map ιPf : Ab → A is given by

                            a) = JΩ ⟨f |e−ip̂hΩ JΩ e−ip̂hΩ b
                       ιPf (b                              aeip̂hΩ JΩ eip̂hΩ |f ⟩JΩ = ⟨f |b
                                                                                          a|f ⟩,             (5.8)

where in the last equality we used that f is real valued to pass the JΩ past ⟨f | and |f ⟩.
Hence, we find that taking the partial expectation value with respect to the wavefunction
f defines a UCP map from Ab to A that serves as a Petz map dual to the inclusion map
(5.4). The quantum channel (ιPf )∗ maps a state φ on A to a state (ιPf )∗ φ = φ ◦ ιPf on the
crossed product A.
                 b If φ arises from the vector state |Φ⟩, it follows immediately from (5.8)
      b = |Φ, f ⟩ induces the state φ ◦ ιP on A.
that |Φ⟩                                       b Hence, we find that the classical-quantum
                                         f
states which were the focus of our investigations into the GSL have the interpretation of a
Petz recovery of a state |Φ⟩ on the quantum field theory subalgebra A.
    Because |Φ⟩
             b and |Ω⟩
                    b are images of the states |Φ⟩ and |Ω⟩ under the Petz recovery channel
(ιPf )∗ , the relative entropy computed in Ab of these states must be less than the corresponding
relative entropy computed in A, which follows from Uhlmann’s general monotonicity theorem
for relative entropy under the action of a quantum channel [80,81]. This monotonicity result
places a lower bound on the corrections to the semiclassical expression of the entropy for the
state |Φ⟩.
        b To derive the bound, recall from equation (2.8) that the density matrix for the
state |Ω⟩
       b is given by
                                         ρΩb = g(q̂)eq̂ ,                                (5.9)
where g(q̂) = |f (q̂)|2 . We can then write the relative entropy in Ab as
                 A b b
                Srel (Φ||Ω) = ⟨Φ|
                               b log ρ b − log ρ b |Φ⟩
                                                    b = −S(ρ b ) − ⟨f | log g(q̂) + q̂|f ⟩
                   b
                                      Φ         Ω           Φ
                                  A
                               = Srel (Φ||Ω) − ∆S(ρΦb ),                                                   (5.10)

where in the last equality we have used the semiclassical expansion of the entropy S(ρΦb ) =
     A
−Srel  (Φ||Ω) − ⟨f | log g(q̂) + q̂|f ⟩ + ∆S(ρΦb ) which follows from equation (2.14), with ∆S
denoting the subleading corrections. Monotonicity of relative entropy under the channel
(ιPf )∗ requires that Srel
                        A
                           (Φ||Ω) ≥ SrelA
                                          (Φ||Ω), which, together with (5.10), implies
                                        b b b


                                                    ∆S(ρΦb ) ≥ 0.                                          (5.11)

This is our first key result: the correction to the semiclassical expression for the crossed
product entropy for the state |Φ⟩
                               b is strictly nonnegative.

                                                           47
    We now proceed to derive an explicit expression for the entropy correction ∆S(ρΦb ). The
starting point is the expression (2.12) for the logarithm of the density matrix ρΦb for the
classical-quantum state |Φ⟩
                         b = |Φ, f ⟩. This expression can be written

                     − log ρΦb = −h − q̂ − log X;              X := f (q̂)eip̂h ∆e−ip̂h f ∗ (q̂),             (5.12)
where we have defined
                                             h = hΩ|Φ ,       ∆ = ∆Φ ,                                        (5.13)
and now allow the wavefunction f to be complex.12 The entropy is obtained by taking the
expectation value of − log ρΦb in the state |Φ, f ⟩. The leading semiclassical contribution to
the entropy comes from
                            S0 (ρΦb ) = ⟨Φ, f | − h − log ∆ − q̂ − log g(q̂)|Φ, f ⟩,                          (5.14)
which reproduces the expression (2.14), noting that ⟨Φ| log ∆|Φ⟩ = 0. The correction to the
entropy is therefore given by
                              ∆S(ρΦb ) = ⟨Φ, f | − log X + log(g(q̂)∆)|Φ, f ⟩                                 (5.15)

       To evaluate this, we use the integral representation of the operator logarithm
                                          Z ∞                     
                                                      1         1
                               − log A =       dλ         −                                                   (5.16)
                                           0        λ+A λ+1
to write
                                     Z ∞                                  
                                                     1        1
        − log X + log(g(q̂)∆) =            dλ           −
                                      0             λ+X   λ + g(q̂)∆
                                     Z ∞                                                        !
                                               1                   1                   1              1
                                 =         dλ ∗         eip̂h λ         e−ip̂h − λ                            (5.17)
                                      0      f (q̂)          g(q̂−h)
                                                                     +∆          g(q̂)
                                                                                       +∆           f (q̂)
Since we will eventually take the expectation value of this expression in the state |Φ, f ⟩, it is
convenient to pass this operator through the UCP map ⟨f | · |f ⟩, which results in an operator
acting on the QFT Hilbert space whose expectation value in the state |Φ⟩ yields the entropy
correction. This simplifies the expression due to the identity
                        1
                                   Z        Z
                                                    e−isz      √
                             |f ⟩ = dz|z⟩ = dsdz √ |s⟩ = 2π|0p ⟩,                         (5.18)
                      f (q̂)                          2π
                                                                                            −isz
using the normalization of position and momentum eigenstates ⟨s|z⟩ = e√2π . This then gives
                                                 Z ∞                               !
                                                                1             1
        ⟨f | − log X + log(g(q̂)∆)|f ⟩ = 2π⟨0p |     dλ      λ
                                                                      − λ             |0p ⟩
                                                  0      g(q̂−h)
                                                                  + ∆   g(q̂)
                                                                              +  ∆
                                         Z ∞ Z                                    !
                                                               1            1
                                       =     dλ dz         λ
                                                                     − λ            .       (5.19)
                                          0             g(z−h)
                                                                 + ∆   g(z)
                                                                             +  ∆
  12
     In fact, the phase of the wavefunction has no effect on the entropy, since we can write a generic classical-
quantum state as |Φ, f ⟩ = eiϕ(q̂) |Φ, fr ⟩, where fr (q) is real. Since eiϕ(q̂) is a unitary operator in A,
                                                                                                          b the states
|Φ, f ⟩ and |Φ, fr ⟩ have the same entropy, since the entropy is invariant under the action of unitaries from
the algebra.


                                                         48
   In order to simplify this further, we would like to switch the order of integration and
change variables to λ = g(z)µ. This can only be done if the λ integral converges at fixed
z, which does not hold in the present form. We therefore manipulate it into a form that
does converge at fixed z, making use of the ability to add termsRwhose z-integral is zero.
In particular, we define δ(z, h) := g(z − h) − g(z), which satisfies dzδ(z, h) = 0, and then
express (5.19) as
                             Z ∞ Z
                                           1                  λ
           ⟨f | · · · |f ⟩ =     dλ dz           δ(z, h)
                                       λ + ∆g(z)         λ + ∆g(z − h)
                             Z0 ∞ Z    
                                              1                            1
                           =     dλ dz −            δ(z, h)∆g(z − h)
                              0           λ + ∆g(z)                   λ + ∆g(z − h)
                                                                     
                                               1            1
                                       +               −        δ(z, h) .              (5.20)
                                           λ + g(z)∆ λ + 1
Here we have made use of the operator identity A−1 + B −1 = A−1 (A + B)B −1 , and have
                    1
added the term − λ+1  δ(z, h) in the last line which z-integrates to zero. It is now clear that
the λ integral of each of the two terms in the final expression in (5.20) converges at fixed z,
allowing the order of integration to be reversed.
   The integral in the second line can be performed explicitly, resulting in
   Z    Z ∞                                     Z
                       1          1
     dz      dλ              −         δ(z, h) = − dz log(g(z)∆)δ(z, h)
         0        λ + g(z)∆ λ + 1
                                                  Z
                                                                                
                                               = − dz log g(z) g(z − h) − g(z)
                                                  Z
                                                                 g(z + h)
                                               = − dzg(z) log              =: G(h),          (5.21)
                                                                   g(z)
where in the first line we have used that log(∆)δ(z, h) integrates to zero.
   We define the first line of (5.20) to be −R(∆, h), and simplify its expression by switching
the order of integration and substituting λ = g(z)µ. After subtracting from the integrand a
       1           ∆
term µ+∆  δ(z, h) µ+∆ which integrates to zero, this leads to
                         Z     Z ∞                                           !
                                          1                  1             1
              R(∆, h) = dz          dµ        δ(z, h)∆ µg(z)         −
                                 0     µ+∆                     +  ∆    µ+∆
                                                        g(z−h)
                         Z         Z ∞
                                              1 δ(z, h)       µ      δ(z, h) 1
                      = dzg(z)          dµ               µ    g(z−h)
                                                                                 .      (5.22)
                                     0      µ + ∆ g(z)     +          g(z) µ + ∆
                                                        ∆     g(z)

Hence, the final expression for the entropy correction is given by
                            ∆S(ρΦb ) = ⟨Φ| − R(∆, h) + G(h)|Φ⟩,                              (5.23)
with G(h) defined by (5.21) and R(∆, h) by (5.22).
   The first observation to make about this expression is that R(∆, h) is a positive operator.
                                                                              1
This follows from the fact that the term in the middle of the integrand µ g(z−h)     takes the
                                                                              ∆
                                                                                  +   g(z)



                                              49
                                     
                          ∆      g(z)
form of a parallel sum    µ
                             : g(z−h) . The parallel sum of two positive, invertable operators
                               1
is defined by (A : B) = A−1 +B −1 , and the resulting operator is also positive [121, Chapter
                        g(z)
36]. Since both ∆
                µ
                   and g(z−h)  are positive for all values of µ and z in the range of integration,
the middle
          operatorin (5.22) is manifestly positive. The full integrand then takes the form
        † ∆     g(z)
µg(z)C µ : g(z−h)      C, where the operator C depends on µ, z, ∆, and h, and hence R(∆, h)
is the integral of a collection of positive operators with respect to a positive measure. This
demonstrates that R(∆, h) is positive.
   Positivity of R(∆, h) then leads to an upper bound on ∆S(ρΦb ) in terms of the expectation
value of G(h), as is clear from (5.23). Combining with the bound (5.11), this leads to
                                     0 ≤ ∆S(ρΦb ) ≤ ⟨Φ|G(h)|Φ⟩.                             (5.24)
Hence, the entropy variation is upper bounded by a function of the relative modular operator
h = hΩ|Φ , whose precise form depends on the wavefunction f (q̂). These bounds were recently
employed in a nongravitational setting in [115] to obtain rigorous statements about quantum
field theory entropies regulated by the crossed product.
    The next point about the entropy correction is that it has no first order contribution in
                                                                                ′
the semiclassical expansion, so the correction is generically O(ε2 ) with ε ∼ gg . The expression
(5.22) for R(∆, h) is manifestly O(ε2 ) since δ(z, h) = −g ′ (z)h + O(ε2 ), and two factors of
δ(z, h) appear in R(∆, h). The contribution from G(h) is also O(ε2 ), since the first order
contribution integrates to zero,
                                                                       2 !
                                      g ′ (z) 1 2 g ′′ (z) 1 2 g ′ (z)
                       Z                                       
            G(h) = − dzg(z) h                + h          − h               + O(ε3 )
                                       g(z)   2 g(z)       2     g(z)
                            g ′ (z)2 2
                       Z
                     1
                   =     dz         h + O(ε3 ).                                            (5.25)
                     2       g(z)
This demonstrates that the semiclassical expression (2.14) for the crossed product entropy is
valid up to ε2 corrections. In particular, this implies that it is difficult to violate the second
law in perturbation theory, since generically the decrease in relative entropy will more than
compensate the change in the O(ε2 ) terms in the entropy.
   We can simplify the contribution of R(∆, h) to the entropy correction by evaluating this
operator in the state |Φ⟩. Because ∆|Φ⟩ = |Φ⟩, we find that
                    Z        D δ(z, h) Z ∞        µ         1       δ(z, h) E
  ⟨Φ|R(∆, h)|Φ⟩ = dzg(z) Φ                  dµ                                Φ
                                  g(z) 0       (µ + 1)2 µ + g(z−h) g(z)
                                                        ∆     g(z)
                    Z        D δ(z, h) 1 Z ∞          µ             1              1 δ(z, h)
                                                                                                E
                 = dzg(z) Φ            ∆2      dµ                               ∆  2          Φ
                                  g(z)      0     (µ + 1)2 µ + ∆ 12 g(z−h) ∆ 12       g(z)
                                                                      g(z)
                                                                
                                                   1 g(z − h)
                    Z        D δ(z, h) 1                                 1 δ(z, h)
                                                                1
                                                                                      E
                 = dzg(z) Φ            ∆ R2 ∆
                                        2          2          ∆ 2     ∆  2           Φ ,     (5.26)
                                  g(z)                 g(z)                 g(z)
where we have defined the function
                             Z ∞
                                                 µ          x log x + 1 − x
                   R2 (x) :=     dµ              2
                                                          =                 .               (5.27)
                                 0        (µ + 1) (µ + x)       (1 − x)2

                                                 50
The O(ε2 ) contribution to this expression can be obtained directly by replacing δ(z, h) with
−g ′ (z)h and setting g(z−h)
                       g(z)
                             to 1 inside the argument of R2 . Combining the resulting expression
with (5.25) according to (5.23), we arrive at the expression for the O(ε2 ) contribution to the
entropy
                                          g ′ (z)2
                                    Z                               
                         (2)                              1
                        S (ρΦb ) = dz              ⟨Φ|h     − ∆R2 (∆) h|Φ⟩.               (5.28)
                                           g(z)           2
The final expression simplifies such that the only dependence on the wavefunction g(z) is
through the prefactor
                                                g ′ (z)2
                                           Z
                                     kg := dz            ,                         (5.29)
                                                 g(z)
and the rest of the expression involves an operator constructed purely from the quantum
field theory state, involving the relative modular Hamiltonian hΩ|Φ and the modular operator
∆Φ .
    This expression allows us to verify the bounds (5.24) at O(ε2 ). First, because ∆R2 (∆)
is a positive operator, we immediately find that S (2) (ρΦb ) ≤ 21 kg ⟨Φ|h2 |Φ⟩. To verify the lower
bound, we first note that the operator (1 − ∆) has vanishing expectation value in the state
h|Φ⟩. This follows from the fact that because hΦ |Φ⟩ = 0, we can instead write this state
as (hΩ|Φ − hΦ )|Φ⟩. The operator hΩ|Φ − hΦ is affiliated with A since it is the derivative of
                              −is
the Connes cocycle ∆is  Ω|Φ ∆Φ    at s = 0. Because of this, ⟨Φ|(hΩ|Φ − hΦ )∆Φ (hΩ|Φ − hΦ )|Φ⟩
                  2
= ⟨Φ|(hΩ|Φ − hΦ ) |Φ⟩, which then implies ⟨Φ|h(1 − ∆)h|Φ⟩ = 0. We can therefore add any
multiple of (1 − ∆) to 12 − ∆R2 (∆) without changing its expectation value in the state h|Φ⟩.
It is straightforward to verify from (5.27) that 12 − ∆R2 (∆) − 13 (1 − ∆) ≥ 0, and so
                                                                       
               1                             1                 1
        ⟨Φ|h     − ∆R2 (∆) h|Φ⟩ = ⟨Φ|h         − ∆R2 (∆) − (1 − ∆) h|Φ⟩ ≥ 0.                  (5.30)
               2                             2                 3

This coincides with the lower bound in (5.24). Thus, the second order contribution to the
entropy satisfies the bounds
                                                    1
                                  0 ≤ S (2) (ρΦb ) ≤ kg ⟨Φ|h2 |Φ⟩.                           (5.31)
                                                    2

     The motivation for computing the subleading corrections to the crossed-product entropy
was to try to verify a GSL beyond the leading order in the semiclassical expansion. The
correction terms simplify into a fairly compact form, and the contributions from R(∆, h) can
                                                                    g(z)
be expressed in terms of a Kubo-Ando operator mean of ∆Φ and g(z−h)      [121–123], defined by
the function R2 appearing in (5.26). Although such operator means are useful in constructing
functionals that satisfy data-processing inequalities, in the present context we were unable
to prove monotonicity. The issue is that the operator mean appears sandwiched between the
factors of δ(z, h), so that it is unclear whether the full entropy correction ∆S(ρΦb ) satisfies
a monotonicity property when evaluated for a crossed product associated with a later cut
of the horizon. It is not even clear if we should expect ∆S(ρΦb ) to be separately monotonic;
the GSL, if it holds for crossed product algebras, would allow ∆S(ρΦb ) to decrease as long as
it is compensated by a larger increase in leading order entropy, determined by the decrease

                                                51
in relative entropy Srel (Φ||Ω). If such a monotonicity result held, it would lead to a novel
data-processing inequality for the relative entropy
                           C              Cλ
                         Srelλ̃ (Φ||Ω) − Srel (Φ||Ω) ≤ ∆S(ρλ̃Φb ) − ∆S(ρλΦb )                (5.32)

with ∆S(ρΦb ) determined by (5.23) and an arbitrary positive probability distribution g(z).
In any situation where ∆S(ρΦb ) decreases, so that the right side of (5.32) is negative, this
inequality would lead to an improvement of the standard data-processing inequality that
only requires that the relative entropy decreases.
    At this point, the only definitive statement we have is that it is difficult to violate
monotonicity of the crossed product entropy perturbatively in the semiclassical expansion,
because the corrections are O(ε2 ). Thus in order to violate the second law, we would need
the relative entropy for the quantum fields to be close to constant when moving between two
cuts, so that its change is able to compete with the O(ε2 ) terms. We also know that because
the entropy satisfies a global second law, as discussed in section 4.2 and in reference [30], any
violation of the local second law for crossed product entropies must necessarily be temporary.
We leave the question of whether the second law can be violated at short times scales or
whether it holds at all times to future work.


6    Monotonicity from crossed product subalgebras
The perturbative expressions for the crossed product entropies obtained in section 5 obeyed
a number of interesting relations, but it was ultimately inconclusive whether these entropies
satisfy a second law. Part of the issue is that the crossed product obscures the subalgebra
structure of the underlying quantum field theory algebras, as is evidenced by the factors eip̂hΩ ,
e−ip̂hΩ that dress the quantum field operators appearing in the crossed product (5.3). Since
the modular Hamiltonians hλΩ for subalgebras Cλ associated with different horizon cuts are
different, generically these dressing factors will mix a subalgebra Cλ̃ ⊂ Cλ throughout the en-
tire algebra. Once we include the asymptotic charge
                                                 D       q̂ in the algebra,
                                                                    E       this mixing will prevent
                                                      λ̃        λ̃
the crossed product of the subalgebra, Cbλ̃ = eip̂hΩ ce−ip̂hΩ , q̂ with c ∈ Cλ̃ , from obviously
                                                                                   D               E
                                                                                        λ       λ
forming a subalgebra of the crossed product of the larger algebra Cbλ = eip̂hΩ be−ip̂hΩ , q̂
with b ∈ Cλ . Since a second law should have an underlying quantum information theo-
retic justification such as the existence of a quantum channel (which naturally arises when
working with subalgebras), the failure of the crossed product algebras to form subalgebras
poses a possible obstruction to the existence of a generalized second law beyond the leading
semiclassical approximation.
    This suggests that one possibility for arriving at a second law is to look for a subalgebra
of Cλ that is naturally isomorphic to the crossed product of the quantum field subalgebra Cbλ̃ .
   b
The condition for such subalgebras to occur is precisely the existence of an operator-valued
weight from Cλ to Cλ̃ [45]. An operator-valued weight can be viewed as a sort of unnormalized
conditional expectation between von Neumann algebras that may be finite on only a subset
of operators; therefore, it generalizes the notion of a conditional expectation in the same

                                                 52
way that weights generalize the notion of states on the von Neumann algebra. Formally,
an operator-valued weight for an algebra inclusion B ⊂ A is a linear map T from A+ , the
positive operators in A, into the extended positive cone Be+ of B, which roughly consists
of positive operators in B along with the addition of certain unbounded positive operators
affiliated with B [87, Section IX.4] [44, 45]. Like conditional expectations, operator-valued
weights satisfy the bimodule property T (b† ab) = b† T (a)b for all b ∈ B, a ∈ A+ .
    If T is an operator-valued weight satisfying the additional technical requirements of faith-
fulness, normality, and semifiniteness, then we can take a weight φ on B and compose it with
T to obtain a faithful, semifinite, normal weight ω = φ ◦ T on the larger algebra A. This
weight has the property that the modular flow with respect to ω preserves the subalgebra B,
and agrees with the modular flow of the weight φ on B. This result is a direct generalization
of Takesaki’s theorem for conditional expectations to the case of operator-valued weights,
and in fact the existence of the pair of weights ω, φ on A, B with this property is equivalent
to the existence of the operator-valued weight T [45]. The main difference from a conditional
expectation is that T may assign infinite values to the entire subalgebra B while still being
finite on a dense subalgebra of A, whereas a conditional expectation assigns a finite value to
all operators and is normalized to map the identity 1 to itself.
    Before discussing the implications of the operator-valued weight on the structure of
crossed products, we first consider whether one should expect an operator-valued weight
to exist between two horizon-cut algebras Cλ̃ ⊂ Cλ . One reason to expect that the operator-
valued weight exists is due to the analogy with split inclusions. A split inclusion B ⊂ A is
one for which there exists a type I factor N that interpolates B and A, in the sense that
B ⊂ N ⊂ A [124]. Such inclusions often occur for quantum field theory algebras when B
and A are algebras associated with causally complete nested subregions RA and RB such
that there is a finite corridor between RB and RA ; the technical requirement on the regions
is that the closure of RB is contained in the interior of RA , and the field theory is said to
satisfy the split property if in such a situation B ⊂ A is always a split inclusion [49, Section
V.5].
    When both A and B are type III1 algebras associated with local subregions in quantum
field theory, the existence of the type I interpolating algebra N implies that there cannot be
a (normal) conditional expectation E from A to B. The reason is that such a conditional
expectation would restrict to a conditional expectation from N to B, which is not possible
since conditional expectations cannot exist to a subalgebra with a higher type, i.e. there are
no conditional expectations from a type I algebra to a type III subalgebra. On the other
hand, N at the same time guarantees the existence of a normal, faithful, semifinite operator-
valued weight T from A to B. This is because there always exists such an operator-valued
weight when either the algebra or the subalgebra is type I, so there are operator-valued
weights TN ,A from A to N and TB,N from N to B [44, 45]. Composing these results in an
operator-valued weight T = TB,N ◦TN ,A from A to B, which is normal, faithful, and semifinite
if both TN ,A and TB,N are [87, Proposition IX.4.16].
    Unfortunately, the existence of an operator-valued weight in the case of a split inclusion
does not give any immediate information about the horizon-cut inclusion Cλ̃ ⊂ Cλ , which is
instead a half-sided modular inclusion. Half-sided modular inclusions are never split [43],

                                              53
so the above arguments do not apply for algebras associated with nested cuts of a Killing
horizon. In this case, it still seems unlikely that there is a conditional expectation from Cλ
to Cλ̃ ; for example, in the free field theory case where the relative commutant Cλ̃′ ∧ Cλ forms
a nontrivial factor consisting of fields smeared between the cuts, the conditional expectation
would imply a factorization of the algebras across the horizon cut λ̃, which is not a property
expected in quantum field theory.13 However, this leaves open the possibility that there exists
an operator-valued weight from Cλ to Cλ̃ . One might expect that you could argue for such
an operator-valued weight by considering a sequence of algebras Cλ̃,n ⊂ Cλ̃ of regions whose
entangling surfaces are located off of the horizon and spacelike separated from the entangling
surface of Cλ , which approach Cλ̃ in the limit n → ∞. Since each inclusion Cλ̃,n ⊂ Cλ is then
split, there is a sequence of operator-valued weights Tn to each of these subalgebras. One
might hope that these limit to an operator-valued weight T from Cλ to Cλ̃ in the limit n → ∞;
unfortunately, it is difficult to make a rigorous argument to this effect. Nevertheless, there is
no argument we know of that obviously precludes such an operator-valued weight, and so we
will conjecture that one indeed exists, and explore the implications for the crossed product
algebras.
    The existence of an operator-valued weight between horizon-cut algebras implies a sub-
algebra structure for the crossed product algebras. To simplify notation for the rest of this
section, we denote the earlier horizon cut algebra as B and the later algebra as C ⊂ B, with T
denoting the operator-valued weight from B to C. To see how the crossed product Cb embeds
as a subalgebra of B,
                    b we begin by defining a weight χ on B by composing the vacuum state
on C, ωC = ⟨Ω| · |Ω⟩, with the operator-valued weight,

                                              χ = ωC ◦ T.                                            (6.1)

We denote the unitary operator implementing modular flow for this weight on B as ∆−is   χ|ω =
  ishχ|ω                                                                    ′
e        , where ω refers to the vacuum weight on the commutant algebra B , and is needed to
define how hχ|ω acts in the global QFT Hilbert space, including its action on operators in B ′ .
Since χ is obtained as a pullback via T , Haagerup’s theorem for operator-valued weights [45]
guarantees that modular flow with respect to ∆−is χ|ω on the subaglebra C agrees with modular
                                        −is   ishωC
flow for the state ωC , generated by ∆ωC = e        ,

                                 ∆−is   is     −is  is
                                  χ|ω c∆χ|ω = ∆ωC c∆ωC ,        ∀c ∈ C.                              (6.2)


    This relation immediately demonstrates that the crossed product Be constructed using
                   D weight χ contains
modular flow for the                  E  D the crossed product
                                                           E      Cb as a subalgebra, since Cb =
 ∆−ip̂   ip̂ itq̂
   ωC c∆ωC e      = ∆−ip̂    ip̂ itq̂
                       χ|ω c∆χ|ω e      ⊂ ∆−ip̂   ip̂ itq̂
                                            χ|ω b∆χ|ω e      = B.
                                                               e We can then apply Connes’s
result [126] [87, Section VIII.3] that modular flows with respect to different weights are
related to each other by a unitary in the algebra,

                             ∆−is   is              −is is         †
                              χ|ω b∆χ|ω = uχ|ω (−s)∆ω b∆ω uχ|ω (−s) ,                                (6.3)
  13
    In this case, one can argue that the inclusion extends to a Mobius-covariant net associated with a
family of translated horizon cuts, which allows one to prove that no conditional expectation from Cλ to Cλ̃
exists [125].


                                                    54
where the Connes cocycle uχ|ω (−s) is defined by

                                     uχ|ω (−s) = ∆−is  is
                                                  χ|ω ∆ω ∈ B.                                    (6.4)

Following the arguments from [29], we can conjugate the crossed product algebra Be by a
unitary constructed from the cocycle
                                                            −ip̂ ip̂
                                U ≡ u(−p̂) := uχ|ω (−p̂) = ∆χ|ω ∆ω                               (6.5)

in order to map it into the original crossed product algebra Bb = ∆−ip̂ ip̂ itq̂
                                                                   ω b∆ω e       . To show
this, we need the identity

      U † eitq̂ U = ∆−ip̂
                     ω e              ∆ω = ∆ω−ip̂ e−ithχ|ω ∆ip̂
                          it(q̂−hχ|ω ) ip̂
                                                            ωe      e = ∆−ip̂
                                                                ithω itq̂            ip̂ itq̂
                                                                          ω uχ|ω (t)∆ω e         (6.6)
                                                                             −ip̂
which is an element of Bb since uχ|ω (t) ∈ B. Hence, a generic element b̃ = ∆χ|ω  b∆ip̂
                                                                                    χ|ω e
                                                                                          itq̂
                                                                                               in Be
maps to

                                 U † b̃U = ∆ω−ip̂ buχ|ω (t)∆ip̂
                                                            ωe
                                                                itq̂
                                                                     ∈ B.
                                                                       b                         (6.7)

This shows that U † BU
                    e = B.
                        b

   Now because Cb ⊂ B, e the conjugated algebra C¯ = U † CU      b is a subalgebra of B.
                                                                                      b By
                                −ip̂ ip̂ itq̂                 †
conjugating a generic element ∆χ|ω c∆χ|ω e in C by U (·)U , we find a generating set of
                                                   b
              ¯
operators for C:
                               C¯ = ∆ω−ip̂ c uχ|ω (t)∆ωip̂ eitq̂                         (6.8)
Thus, we have constructed a subalgebra of Bb unitarily equivalent to C.
                                                                     b We can therefore
                         b Cb from C into B by
define an inclusion map ιB,        b      b

                                            b Cb(b
                                           ιB,   c) = U †bcU.                                    (6.9)

Since this is a UCP map, its dual is a quantum channel from states on Bb to states on C.  b
We would therefore like to leverage this channel and the monotonicity of relative entropy to
arrive at some version of a second law for the crossed product algebras.
    The most straightforward way to do this is to examine the relative entropy of a generic
state |Φ⟩
       b with respect to a specific vacuum weight on the algebra. In general, it is possible
to define the relative entropy Srel (φ||ψ) where φ is a state while ψ is only a weight which
may not be normalized, and could even be unbounded in the sense that ψ(1) = ∞ [81,
Chapter 7]. In fact, the type II∞ entropies that we have computed throughout this paper
are naturally interpreted as minus the relative entropy with respect to the tracial weight
on the algebra [81, 102, 127]. For algebras possessing a trace, one can always find a density
matrix ρψ affiliated with the algebra that reproduces expectation values for the weight via

                                           ψ(b) = Tr(ρψ b).                                     (6.10)

Because the weight ψ need not be normalized, this density matrix no longer necessarily
satisfies Tr ρψ = 1.

                                                   55
    For the crossed product, choosing the trace as the reference weight is problematic because
the trace on Bb does not restrict to a semifinite weight on the subalgebra C.  ¯ Instead, there is
an operator-valued weight Tb from Bb to C¯ constructed from T such that TrBb = TrC¯ ◦Tb, where
                                ¯ However, unless Tb is bounded so that it can be normalized to
TrC¯ is the semifinite trace on C.
be a conditional expectation (which we do not expect for nested horizon cuts), Tb will blow up
on the subalgebra C,  ¯ showing that Tr b is not semifinite on this algebra. A more convenient
                                         B
reference is the dual weight ω   b arising from the vacuum state |Ω⟩ in the crossed product
construction. √This dual weight can be formally represented as arising from an infinite norm
vector |Ω⟩
         b = 2π|Ω, 0p ⟩, where |0p ⟩ is the zero momentum eigenstate used in the expression
for the trace on the crossed product. This vector also defines the dual weight for the Cb
crossed product algebra, and furthermore has the property that it is invariant under the
unitary U = u(−p̂) in equation (6.5) defining the map from Cb to C.       ¯ Defining the weight
bB = 2π⟨Ω, 0p |(·)|Ω, 0p ⟩ and similarly for ω
ω                                            bC , we find that ω
                                                               bB restricts to a semifinite weight
    ¯ and further more pulls back to the weight ω
on C,                                                bC under the inclusion map (6.9),
                          ωB ◦ ιB,
                         (b           c) = 2π⟨Ω, 0p |U † bc U |Ω, 0p ⟩ = ω
                                b Cb)(b                                  bC (bc).          (6.11)

   We now consider another state φ  b arising from a vector |Φ⟩.
                                                             b Monotonicity of relative
entropy for the UCP map ιB,
                         b Cb then states that

                    B              C                              C
                   Srel  b ωB ) ≥ Srel
                        (φ||b          (φ    b Cb||b
                                        b ◦ ιB,    ωB ◦ ιB,
                                                         b Cb) = Srel (φ    b Cb||b
                                                                       b ◦ ιB,    ωC )     (6.12)
                     b                  b                           b



where the second equality applies (6.11). The state φ     b Cb on C is the expectation value in
                                                     b ◦ ιB,      b
the vector state U |Φ⟩.
                    b To convert this into a statement about entropies, we note that the
density matrices for the weights ω
                                 bB and ωbC are given in both cases by
                                                ρωb = eq̂ ,                                (6.13)
which follows immediately from the definition (6.10) of the density matrix and the expression
(2.9) for the trace on the two algebras.
   In terms of the density matrices, the relative entropy is given by the usual expression
                                     b ω ) = Tr(ρφb(log ρφb − log ρωb ))
                               Srel (φ||b                                                  (6.14)
and hence
                                  Bb
                                 Srel  b ωB ) = −S(ρBΦb ) − ⟨Φ|q̂|
                                      (φ||b                  b Φ⟩,                         (6.15)
                                                      b            b
showing that this relative entropy can be interpreted as a free energy with respect to the
asymptotic charge −q̂, which is given by either the asymptotic area or the ADM mass in
the crossed product constructions discussed in sections 3.3 and 4.2 (see equations (3.45) and
(4.29)). The right hand side of (6.12) evaluates to
                           Cb
                          Srel  b ◦ ιB,
                               (φ          ωC ) = −S(ρCU Φb ) − ⟨Φ|U
                                     b Cb||b
                                                                 b † q̂U |Φ⟩.              (6.16)
                                                       b                  b

Hence, the monotonicity result (6.12) implies the entropy inequality

                               S(ρCU Φb ) + ⟨Φ|U
                                             b † q̂U − q̂|Φ⟩
                                                          b ≥ S(ρBb ).                     (6.17)
                                    b                                   b
                                                                 Φ


                                                   56
    This is not quite the statement of the second law we were seeking. First, the entropy
on the left hand side is computed for a different state U |Φ⟩
                                                            b for the algebra Cb instead of the
original state |Φ⟩.
                b Second, there is an additional term involving the difference in expectation
value of q̂ between the state U |Φ⟩b and |Φ⟩.b As it turns out, at leading order in the semi-
classical expansion, these two differences cancel out, and the inequality (6.17) reduces to the
semiclassical second law discussed in sections 3.3 and 4.2. To see this, we set |Φ⟩  b = |Φ, f ⟩
                                            f′
with the wavefunction f slowly varying, f ∼ O(ε). As discussed in [30], because the unitary
U is a cocycle flow with parameter p̂, it leaves the state |Φ, f ⟩ invariant up to corrections of
order ε. This means that at this order, we can approximate the density matrix ρU Φb by ρΦb ,
and hence
                 − log ρU Φb ≈ − log ρΦb ≈ −q̂ − hΩ|Φ + hΦ − log |f (q̂)|2 + O(ε).         (6.18)

    The entropy S(ρU Φb ) is obtained as the expectation value of − log ρU Φb in the state U |Φ⟩.
                                                                                              b
Again because U leaves the state |Φ⟩ b nearly invariant, most terms in this expectation value
are the same as in the state |Φ⟩
                              b at leading order in the semiclassical expansion. The exception
is the operator q̂, which shifts when conjugated by the cocycle,

                               U † q̂U = q̂ + hω − eip̂hω hχ|ω e−ip̂hω .                   (6.19)

However, we see that this shift is compensated by the additional terms appearing in the
inequality (6.17): the entropy of ρU Φb admits the approximation,

              S(ρCU Φb ) ≈ ⟨Φ|U
                            b † (−q̂ − hΩ|Φ + hΦ − log |f (q̂)|2 )U |Φ⟩
                  b                                                  b
                            b − q̂ − hΩ|Φ + hΦ − log |f (q̂)|2 |Φ⟩
                         ≈ ⟨Φ|                                        b − U † q̂U |Φ⟩
                                                                b + ⟨Φ|q̂          b

                      ≈ S(ρCΦb ) + ⟨Φ|q̂
                                    b − U † q̂U |Φ⟩                                        (6.20)
                             b                   b

and plugging this into the inequality (6.17) reproduces the second law for crossed product
algebras at leading order in the semiclassical expansion,

                                     S(ρCΦb ) + O(ε) ≥ S(ρBΦb ).                           (6.21)
                                          b                   b



Hence, assuming the existence of the operator-valued weight between horizon cuts, we are
able to establish a subalgebra explanation for the semiclassical generalized second law derived
in sections 3.3 and 4.2.
   Finally, it is interesting to note that the terms in (6.17) that could spoil the proposed
                                                                                 Cb b
second law can be written as a relative entropy difference. Noting that Srel       (Φ||b
                                                                                       ωC ) =
     Cb
−S(ρΦb ) − ⟨q̂⟩Φb , we can rewrite the inequality (6.17) as

                         S(ρCΦb ) + Srel
                                     Cb b            Cb
                                             ωC ) − Srel
                                         (Φ||b              b ωC ) ≥ S(ρBbb).
                                                         (U Φ||b                           (6.22)
                              b
                                                                        Φ

                                                                      Cb b           Cb
Hence, depending on the sign of the relative entropy difference Srel         ωC ) − Srel
                                                                         (Φ||b           (U Φ||b
                                                                                            b ωC )
between the states |Φ⟩
                     b and U |Φ⟩
                               b on C,b we can either guarantee the second law holds (when the
difference is negative or zero), or derive a necessary condition on the state |Φ⟩
                                                                               b for a violation

                                                  57
to occur (the difference is positive). At present, there does not seem to be any constraint
on the sign of this relative entropy difference, but examining it more closely may result in
further insights into the crossed product second law. One statement that seems to hold is
that this difference should be O(ε2 ) in the semiclassical expansion, since the perturbative
calculations of section 5 demonstrated that the second law for semiclassical states holds up
to linear order in ε.



7    Discussion

The overarching goal of this paper has been to explore properties of subsystem gravitational
algebras for regions defined by arbitrary cuts of a Killing horizon. These regions provide
nontrivial examples where the modular Hamiltonian of a vacuum state |Ω⟩ is known and
generates a geometric flow along the horizon, which facilitates the construction of type II∞
gravitationally dressed crossed-product algebras following the general procedure of JSS [33].
As reviewed in section 3.1, the geometric flow of this state follows from properties of half-
sided translations and the ANEC, and holds even for interacting quantum field theories.
We found that entropies of semiclassical states in the crossed product algebra reproduce the
generalized entropy of the horizon cut, and for these states we were able to reduce the second
law for crossed product algebras to Wall’s derivation of the generalized second law [38]. The
crossed-product second law improves on Wall’s result by identifying a gravitational von
Neumann algebra whose entropy is computed by the generalized entropy, with the further
advantage that crossed-product entropies are manifestly UV finite, so that one does not need
to worry about subtleties involving the renormalization of the quantum field entanglement
entropy.
    After discussing the case of AdS black holes, we presented in section 4.1 a novel approach
to treating asymptotically flat and de Sitter black holes using the concept of an algebra at
infinity for the half-sided translation. This algebra naturally characterizes the degrees of
freedom that never enter the black hole. Using a theorem of Borchers which guarantees the
existence of a conditional expectation to this algebra at infinity [85], we discussed how to
handle the generalized second law in this context, even in the case of an interacting theory
where one expects the algebra of fields strictly localized to the horizon to the future of a
cut to be trivial. We also described the construction of gravitational algebras for these
alternative asymptotics, which lead to nontrivial matching conditions at asymptotic infinity.
    Finally, we explored the question of whether the crossed product algebras satisfy a gener-
alized second law beyond the leading semiclassical approximation of the states. We derived
in section 5 formulas for the corrections to the crossed-product entropy, and showed that
the first correction appears at second order in the semiclassical expansion. Although we ob-
tained explicit expressions for the entropy corrections, we were unable to determine whether
these corrections can be used to violate the second law at short time scales. However, we
noted that because the gravitational algebra at infinity defines a trace-preserving inclusion
inside the dressed horizon-cut algebras, the entropy at infinity must be larger than that of
the horizon cut algebra. This gives a global second law which generalizes a similar result

                                             58
appearing in [30], and necessarily constrains any possible violation of the second law between
horizon cuts to be temporary. After this, we explored in section 6 the possibility that nested
horizon-cut gravitational algebras could form a subalgebra structure using the conjectured
existence of an operator-valued weight between horizon cuts. This leads to a monotonicity
constraint on entropies between two horizon cuts, but involving different states at different
cuts. We showed that this monotonicity result still reduces to the second law at leading order
in the semiclassical expansion, and left open the question of whether it can be leveraged to
produce a stronger result.
   The investigations carried out in this work have lead to a number of intriguing questions
and directions for future work, so we conclude by describing some of these.


Singular vacua as semifinite weights. In the discussion of rotating black holes in section
4.3, we confronted the issue that there does not appear to be a natural vacuum state whose
modular flow is geometric on the algebra at infinity. The closest analog is the Frolov-
Thorne vacuum, which is well known to become singular in the region far from the black
hole where the horizon-generating Killing vector is spacelike. Ordinarily, quantization about
such a singular state results in a unitarily inequivalent representation of the quantum field
algebra, which is likely not the correct description of quantum fields on a smooth background
geometry. However, we raised the possibility that one could reinterpret this vacuum as a
nonnormalizable weight on the physical von Neumann algebra of fields in the black hole
exterior. Having a weight, as opposed to a state, whose modular flow is geometric is sufficient
to arrive at a gravitational algebra with a trace following the JSS construction. Similarly,
the Unruh vacuum, which provides the more accurate description of an astrophysical black
hole formed from collapse, yields a unitarily inequivalent representation of the quantum field
algebra from the Hartle-Hawking vacuum. However, the latter vacuum provides the state
whose modular flow is geometric on the horizon, and hence one would like a description where
both states can be treated in a single representation of the field algebra. We suggested the
possibility that when quantizing around the Unruh vacuum, the Hartle-Hawking vacuum
could be treated as a semifinite weight.
    These points motivate the broader question of determining when a singular state of the
quantum field algebra can be reinterpreted as a semifinite weight. One important aspect of
such a procedure is identifying the correct definition subalgebra for the weight (see e.g. [87,
Section VII.1]). Given a weight φ on a von Neumann algebra A, we can identify a subcone
of the set of positive operators A+ with finite weight,

                                   pφ = {a ∈ A+ |φ(a) < ∞}.                                  (7.1)

The linear span of pφ forms the definition subalgebra mφ ⊂ A of the weight φ. In general, mφ
is not a C ∗ -algebra since it need not contain uniform limits of operators, and therefore is not a
von Neumann algebra either. The definition subalgebra is also not unital for nonnormalizable
weights, since if φ(1) < ∞, one could rescale φ to make it a state. If the weight φ is semifinite,
the weak closure of mφ yields the full von Neumann algebra A. Because of this last fact,
one can still perform an analog of the GNS representation for this algebra with respect to
the weight φ called the semicyclic representation, and such a representation with respect to

                                                59
a faithful, semifinite, normal weight is unitarily equivalent to the GNS representation with
respect to a faithful normal state. This fact allows many of the results of Tomita-Takesaki
theory to apply to the case of semifinite weights.
    The re-interpretation of singular states in quantum field theory as semifinite weights thus
requires a careful analysis of the associated definition subalgebra mφ . Since in the case of the
Frolov-Thorne vacuum, the region in the black hole exterior where the state is regular has a
causal completion consisting of the entire exterior, it is possible this region can be used to
identify an appropriate weakly dense definition subalgebra for the Frolov-Thorne vacuum,
viewed as a weight. Similar comments apply to the Hartle-Hawking vacuum for the algebra
constructed from the Unruh state. We believe that working out the details of this weight
interpretation of singular vacua may provide important insights into the relevance of these
states and further inform the construction of gravitational algebras.



GSL violation or improved monotonicity. Upon computing the corrections to the
crossed product entropy for states of the form |Φ, f ⟩ in section 5, we were ultimately unable to
determine whether these corrections can be used to violate the leading order second law found
in sections 3.3 and 4.2. The leading order statement follows from monotonicity of relative
entropy for the quantum field subalgebra of the crossed product, and so if the entropy still
satisfies a second law upon including the subleading corrections, it would require a modified
bound on the amount the quantum field relative entropy decreases between horizon cuts. In
some cases, this bound would improve the standard data-processing inequality that relative
entropy must decrease between horizon cuts. It would therefore be interesting to relate the
proposed bound to other recent works on improving the data-processing inequality and its
connection to universal recovery channels [116–118].
    One possible avenue at arrive at a nontrivial bound is the conjectured subalgebra struc-
ture for crossed products discussed in section 6. This structure relies on the existence of
an operator-valued weight between algebras for nested cuts of the Killing horizon, whose
existence has not been proven. This leads to the following purely mathematical questions
in the theory of operator algebras: given a half-sided modular inclusion N ⊂ M, can there
exist an operator-valued weight T from M to N ? Does this always occur, and if one exists,
what are its properties? In the context of half-sided modular inclusions arising from hori-
zon cuts, if such an operator-valued weight existed, it should possess a natural construction
using tools from quantum field theory. In the interacting case where we expect the relative
commutant N ′ ∧ M to be trivial, the operator-valued weight would have to be unique, since
if another operator-valued weight existed, the cocycle between the two weights would define
a nontrivial element of the relative commutant. Even in the free case where the relative
commutant is nontrivial, there should be a preferred operator-valued weight that restricts to
the horizon vacuum state on the relative commutant. Hence, a tangible goal for the future
is to explicitly construct the operator-valued weight, or prove that one does not exist.
   Assuming the existence of such an operator-valued weight, we found a version of the
second law for crossed products, equation (6.17), that does not rely on any semiclassical
approximation. Unfortunately, we do not at present have a simple interpretation of the

                                               60
derived inequality, since it involves the entropy of a different state at a later cut of the
horizon, as well as the change in the expectation value of the asymptotic charge between
the two states. It would be interesting to better understand this inequality, since at the
very least it constrains any violation of the crossed product second law to be bounded by a
relative entropy difference of two states, as evidenced by equation (6.22).


Connections to dynamical horizon entropy. One output of the construction of gravi-
tational algebras for horizon cuts is that it yields an algebra whose entropy directly coincides
with the generalized entropy of the horizon cut. This supports the idea that in the limit of
weak gravitational coupling, this entropy can be interpreted as an entanglement entropy, sub-
ject to the caveat that entropies in type II algebras are most naturally thought of as vacuum-
subtracted entropies [29, 102]. Furthermore, it reinforces the interpretation of the horizon
area as capturing the classical component of the black hole entropy. Recently, an alternative
proposal for the entropy of dynamical black holes has appeared that modifies this classical
component by a term involving the perturbative expansion of the horizon [74, 76, 128]. This
raises the question of whether this entropy has a quantum generalization, and whether one
can account for it in the framework of semiclassical gravitational algebras.
    We note that one aspect of the construction of the gravitational algebras in the present
work is the use of the event horizon boundary condition in section 3.2 in order to interpret
the asymptotic gravitational charge as the late time area of the horizon. Interestingly, the
new dynamical entropy proposal can be interpreted as the area of an apparent horizon in-
side the black hole, as opposed to the area of the event horizon [74, 76]. This is strongly
reminiscent of the Engelhardt-Wall proposal for the coarse-grained outer entropy in the con-
text of AdS/CFT [129, 130]. In our setup, we could arrive at a null surface that intersects
the apparent horizon by relaxing the event horizon boundary condition that the asymptotic
expansion Θ goes to zero. This also suggests that we should include an asymptotic gravita-
tional charge associated with this freedom to choose this boundary condition, since the late
time expansion naturally arises as an asymptotic charge associated to the null translation
along the horizon. The asymptotic past and future expansions are related to the average null
energy along the horizon via a gravitational constraint (3.29), so it raises the possibility that
one should include this asymptotic charge and gravitational dressing for this constraint as
well. It may be that including this translational gravitational charge would lead to a natural
connection to the new dynamical entropy, and may also help in a more complete formulation
of the generalized second law, without the possibility of temporary entropy decrease beyond
the leading semiclassical approximation.


Applications to quantum focusing. A natural generalization of the present work is
to investigate the crossed product construction for more general subregions. Ultimately,
we would like to be able to formulate the quantum focusing conjecture (QFC) [12] as a
statement about crossed product entropies for subregions bounded by a causal horizon. One
benefit of such a description is that it would handle the problem of UV divergences in
the entanglement entropy, which are one of the main technical obstructions to obtaining
rigorous statements about quantum focusing. On the other hand, there is a question of

                                               61
what more we could learn from a crossed-product formulation of the QFC. The gravitational
algebras considered here appear in the GN → 0 limit of quantum gravity, and in this limit
the quantum focusing conjecture in most cases reduces to the classical focusing theorem of
general relativity. In order to arrive at a nontrivial quantum result, one needs to consider
background geometries that classically saturate the focusing inequality, so that perturbative
corrections to the geometry can compete with contributions coming from the change in
entanglement entropy as one evolves along a light sheet. In this limit, quantum focusing
generally reduces to the quantum null energy condition (QNEC), which is a statement purely
about quantum field theory in a fixed background geometry, and there now exist proofs of
the QNEC independent of any assumption about quantum focusing [18–20]. However, we
found even when considering the generalized second law using crossed products, proving that
the entropy increases beyond the leading semiclassical approximation is nontrivial, and could
result in improved data-processing inequalities in quantum field theory. Therefore, it would
be interesting to determine if a similar improvement could arise from the crossed product
formulation of the QFC.
    One of the main advantages of working with a Killing horizon in the present work was
the ability to leverage the ANEC to prove the existence of a state with a geometric mod-
ular flow along the horizon. This suggests that a strategy for finding the necessary states
conjectured in [33] to carry out the crossed product for generic subregions is to look for
related energy conditions adapted to the subregion under consideration. One could look
for positive operators involving a smeared stress tensor over the subregion horizon to try
to establish the existence of a half-sided translation, which then would determine a vacuum
state and modular operator whose flow is boost-like near the subregion entangling surface.
It is possible that the novel energy conditions recently investigated in [131–133] could be
helpful in establishing these positivity results. This may provide a crucial clue for how to
rigorously establish that local gravitational algebras can be realized as a crossed product,
and ultimately help in formulating the QFC in this language.




Acknowledgments

We thank Daine Danielson, Ben Freivogel, Stefan Hollands, Ted Jacobson, Nima Lashkari,
Roberto Longo, Geoff Penington, Pranav Pulakkat, Gautam Satishchandran, Jon Sorce,
Erik Verlinde, Bob Wald, Aron Wall, and Victor Zhang for helpful discussions. A.J.S.
thanks the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences for support and hospitality
during the programme “Black holes: bridges between number theory and holographic quan-
tum information” where work on this paper was undertaken. This work was supported by
EPSRC grant EP/R014604/1. This research is supported in part by the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research under award number FA9550-19-1-036 and by the DOE award number
DE-SC0015655.

                                             62
A     Tomita operators for crossed product algebra

The Tomita operators considered in section 2 for states of the form |Φ⟩b = |Φ, f ⟩ were crucial
for obtaining density matrices and computing the perturbative expansion of entropies for
the crossed product algebra in section 5. Here, we derive the formula for these Tomita
operators, and additionally obtain expressions for the Tomita operators for a more general
class of states obtained from arbitrary superpositions of the |Φ, f ⟩ states. This simplifies
the derivation of the density matrices for these states from [33], and additionally yields new
results in the explicit expressions for the modular conjugations JΦb . This appendix assumes
familiarity with Tomita-Takesaki theory; see [134], [33, Appendix C] for an introduction.
   The crossed product of a QFT algebra A by the modular automorphism group associated
with the state |Ω⟩ ∈ HQFT is generated by the operators

                                       Ab = eip̂h ae−ip̂h , q̂                                (A.1)
                            b = HQFT ⊗ L2 (R), where h = hΩ is the modular Hamiltonian
acting on the Hilbert space H
for the state |Ω⟩. For a given vector state |Φ⟩
                                             b ∈ H
                                                 b for the crossed product algebra, the
Tomita operator is defined to act as
                                             a|Φ⟩
                                         SΦb b    a† |Φ⟩.
                                               b =b   b                                       (A.2)
Hence, we can solve for SΦb by determining the action of a linearly spanning set of operators
a ∈ Ab along with their conjugates b
b                                   a† on the state |Φ⟩.   b Considering the additive basis of
operators
                                     a = eip̂h ae−ip̂h eiuq̂ ,
                                     b                                                  (A.3)
we can compute their action on the classical-quantum states |Φ⟩
                                                             b = |Φ, f ⟩ which were used
in the investigations of the GSL in this paper.
    Before doing this, it is helpful to note how the QFT Tomita operators act in the larger
Hilbert space HQFT ⊗ L2 (R). This is somewhat subtle because the Tomita operators are
antilinear, so there is a choice to make when defining its action on the larger Hilbert space
H.
 b We will define any QFT Tomita operator S to act trivially on the position basis |y⟩ of
L2 (R), i.e.
                                        S|Φ, y⟩ = |SΦ, y⟩                               (A.4)
This implies that S commutes with q̂:
              S q̂|Φ, y⟩ = Sy|Φ, y⟩ = yS|Φ, y⟩ = y|SΦ, y⟩ = q̂|SΦ, y⟩ = q̂S|Φ, y⟩.            (A.5)
On the other hand, S must anticommute with p̂:
                  Z                     Z                        Z
    S p̂|Φ, y⟩ = S dy ⟨y |p̂|y⟩|Φ, y ⟩ = dy ⟨y|p̂|y ⟩S|Φ, y ⟩ = − dy ′ ⟨y ′ |p̂|y⟩|SΦ, y ′ ⟩
                      ′ ′           ′      ′       ′       ′


               = −p̂|SΦ, y⟩ = −p̂S|Φ, y⟩                                                      (A.6)
where we have used that ⟨y|p̂|y ′ ⟩ = −⟨y ′ |p̂|y⟩. We can remember these commutation relations
by noting that q̂ acts as multiplication by a real number in the |y⟩ basis, while p̂ is a derivative

                                                 63
                                      d
times an imaginary number, p̂ = −i dq   . These relations imply that S acts as a standard time-
                                2
reversal transformation on the L (R) Hilbert space, and hence sends a momentum eigenstate
to its negative counterpart, S|Φ, sp ⟩ = |SΦ, −sp ⟩. Finally, we note the action on the state
|Φ, f ⟩,                   Z                     Z
                    S|Φ, f ⟩ =      dySf (y)|Φ, y⟩ =           dyf ∗ (y)|SΦ, y⟩ = |SΦ, f ∗ ⟩       (A.7)

These relations also hold for the antiunitary modular conjugations J.
         We now compute14

                                 a† |Φ⟩
                                 b   b = e−iuq̂ eip̂h a† e−ip̂h |Φ, f ⟩
                                        = e−iuq̂ eip̂h a† e−ip̂h SΦ|Ω SΩ |Ω, f ⟩
                                        = SΦ|Ω SΩ e−iuq̂ eip̂h a† |Ω, f ⟩
                                        = SΦ|Ω SΩ e−iuq̂ eip̂h SΩ a|Ω, f ∗ ⟩
                                        = SΦ|Ω eiuq̂ e−ip̂h a|Ω, f ∗ ⟩
                                               Z
                                        = SΦ|Ω dsff∗ (s)e−ish aeiuq̂ |Ω, s⟩
                                               Z
                                        = SΦ|Ω dsff∗ (s)eis(q̂−h) a|Ω, u⟩
                                          √
                                        = 2πSΦ|Ω f ∗ (q̂ − h)a|Ω, u⟩                               (A.8)

In the third line we have used that SΦ|Ω SΩ is affiliated with A′QFT to commute it to the left,
and in the fifth line we used that SΩ2 = 1 and SΩ eip̂h SΩ = e−ip̂h . On the other hand, we have
that

                               b = eip̂h ae−ip̂h eiuq̂ |Φ, f ⟩
                             a|Φ⟩
                             b
                                    = eip̂h ae−ip̂h eiuq̂ SΦ|Ω SΩ |Ω, f ⟩
                                                Z
                                    = SΦ|Ω SΩ dsf˜(s)eip̂h ae−ip̂h eiuq̂ |Ω, s⟩
                                                Z
                                    = SΦ|Ω SΩ dsf˜(s)eip̂h aeisq̂ |Ω, u⟩
                                      √
                                    = 2πSΦ|Ω SΩ eip̂h f (q̂)a|Ω, u⟩.                               (A.9)

These produce an equation for the Tomita operator via (A.2),

                                   SΦb SΦ|Ω SΩ eip̂h f (q̂) = SΦ|Ω f ∗ (q̂ − h)                  (A.10)

whose solution is
                                                               1 −ip̂h
                                  SΦb = SΦ|Ω f ∗ (q̂ − h)           e  SΩ SΩ|Φ ,                 (A.11)
                                                             f (q̂)
    14
      We follow the conventions of [33, Appendix E] for Fourier transforms. In particular, we have |f ⟩ =
                                        eisy
    dyf (y)|y⟩ = dsf˜(s)|s⟩ and ⟨y|s⟩ = √
R               R
                                          2π
                                             .


                                                        64
noting that SΩ−1 = SΩ , SΦ|Ω
                         −1
                             = SΩ|Φ . We can simplify this to the form

                     1                 q̂              1         1
        SΦb = JΦ|Ω ∆Φ|Ω
                     2
                         f ∗ (q̂ − h)e 2 e−ip̂h q̂             ∆Ω2 SΩ SΩ|Φ                          (A.12)
                                                e 2 f (q̂ + h)
                                                                  "                             #
                           h        1                   q̂
                                                               i           1                1
            = JΦ|Ω e−ip̂h · eip̂h ∆Φ|Ω
                                    2
                                        f ∗ (q̂ − h)e 2 e−ip̂h · q̂                JΩ JΩ|Φ ∆Ω|Φ
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                    (A.13)
                                                                    e 2 f (q̂ + h)

                                                    b and the second term is affiliated with Ab′ .
where the first term in brackets is affiliated with A,
                       †
Note by computing SΦb SΦb , we immediately arrive at the expression for the density matrices
derived in [33],

                             ρΦb = eip̂h f (q̂ − h)eq̂ ∆Φ|Ω f ∗ (q̂ − h)e−ip̂h                      (A.14)
                                       − 12                        2             − 12
                             ρ′Φb = ∆Ω|Φ JΦ|Ω JΩ eq̂ f (q̂ + h) JΩ JΩ|Φ ∆Ω|Φ .                      (A.15)

    It is clear from this construction
                                   R that we can obtain expressions for the Tomita operator of
arbitrary superpositions |Φ⟩ = dλ|Φλ , fλ ⟩ as well, where dλ is some measure for the wave-
                             b
functions indexed by λ, which could in principle include discrete δ−function components. In
this case we have

                         †
                           Z               √ Z
                       a
                       b     dλ|Φλ , fλ ⟩ = 2π dλSΦλ |Ω fλ∗ (q̂ − h)a|Ω, u⟩            (A.16)
                           Z               √ Z
                        a dλ|Φλ , fλ ⟩ = 2π dλSΦλ |Ω SΩ eip̂h fλ (q̂)a|Ω, u⟩
                        b                                                              (A.17)

and hence
       Z                        Z                         −1
                      ∗                           ip̂h
 SΦb =      dλSΦλ |Ω fλ (q̂ − h)     dµSΦµ |Ω SΩ e fµ (q̂)
                 Z                                           Z                                 −1
                                      1
           −ip̂h          ip̂h            ∗            −ip̂h           − 21           1
     = JΩ e         dλe JΩ JΦλ |Ω ∆Φλ |Ω fλ (q̂ − h)e
                                      2
                                                                   dµ∆Ω|Φµ JΦµ |Ω JΩ ∆Ω f (q̂ + h)
                                                                                      2


                 Z                                              Z                                  −1
                                      1
           −ip̂h          ip̂h            ∗            q̂
                                                          −ip̂h             − 12                   q̂
     = JΩ e         dλe JΩ JΦλ |Ω ∆Φλ |Ω fλ (q̂ − h)e e
                                      2                2             dµ∆Ω|Φµ JΦµ |Ω JΩ f (q̂ + h)e 2



                                                                                                    (A.18)

Writing it in this way makes it clear that the Tomita operator can always be expressed in
the form
                          SΦb = JΩ e−ip̂h bs bs′ ,      b bs′ ∈ Ab′ .
                                                   bs ∈ A,                        (A.19)
                                               1
Using the polar decomposition bs = b u ρΦb2 , with b  u a unitary element of Ab and ρΦb the density
                                                       1
           b and similarly writing bs′ = b
matrix for A,                              u′ (ρ′Φb )− 2 , we arrive at the expression for the modular
operator and modular conjugation:

                                 JΦb = JΩ e−ip̂hb
                                                ubu′ ,        ∆Φb = ρΦb (ρ′Φb )−1                   (A.20)

                                                         65
    It is useful to consider this expression for the vacuum classical-quantum states |Ω⟩
                                                                                      b =
|Ω, f ⟩. In that case, the Tomita operator simplifies to

                                                                        1
                          f ∗ (q̂)
                                                      ∗
                                     1                f (q̂)f ∗ (q̂ + h) 2 |f (q̂)|       1
        SΩb = JΩ e−ip̂h            ∆Ω2 = JΩ e−ip̂h                                      ∆Ω2   (A.21)
                        f (q̂ + h)                     f (q̂)f (q̂ + h)    |f (q̂ + h)|

which is now in the form of a polar decomposition, allowing the modular conjugation to be
read off
                                  ∗       ∗
                                                       12
                                  f  (q̂)f   (q̂ + h)                g(q̂)
                 JΩb = JΩ e−ip̂h                           , ∆Ωb =           ∆Ω .  (A.22)
                                   f (q̂)f (q̂ + h)                g(q̂ + h)

This is particularly simple when the wavefunction is real, in which case JΩb = JΩ e−ip̂h .
   It is also helpful to have the Tomita operator for the twirled state |Φ̃⟩ = eip̂h |Φ, f ⟩. We
proceed as before, computing

                         a|Φ̃⟩ = eip̂h ae−ip̂h eiuq̂ eip̂h |Φ, f ⟩
                         b
                                 Z
                               = dsf˜(s)eip̂h ae−ip̂h eiuq̂ eish |Φ, s⟩
                                 Z
                               = dsf˜(s)eip̂h ae−i(p̂−s)h eisq̂ |Φ, u⟩
                                 Z
                               = dsf˜(s)eis(q̂+h) eip̂h ae−ip̂h SΦ|Ω SΩ |Ω, u⟩
                                 √
                               = 2πf (q̂ + h)SΦ|Ω SΩ eip̂h a|Ω, u⟩                            (A.23)

and

                                a† |Φ̃⟩ = e−iuq̂ eip̂h a† e−ip̂h eip̂h |Φ, f ⟩
                                b
                                          Z
                                        = dsf˜(s)eish a† e−iuq̂ |Φ, s⟩
                                          Z
                                        = dsf˜(s)eish a† eisq̂ |Φ, −u⟩
                                          √
                                        = 2πf (q̂ + h)a† |Φ, −u⟩
                                          √
                                        = 2πf (q̂ + h)SΦ|Ω a|Ω, u⟩.                           (A.24)


                           a† |Φ̃⟩, we find that
                   a|Φ̃⟩ = b
Then using that SΦ̃b

                                                                            1
                             SΦ̃ = f (q̂ + h)SΦ|Ω e−ip̂h SΩ SΩ|Φ                              (A.25)
                                                                      f (q̂ + h)

                                                     66
We can then simplify this into a factorized form,
                                                1
                                                              −1          1             1
           SΦ̃ = JΩ f ∗ (q̂ − h)JΩ JΦ|Ω ∆Φ|Ω
                                         2
                                             e−ip̂h ∆Ω 2 JΩ JΩ|Φ ∆Ω|Φ
                                                                  2

                                                                                  f (q̂ + h)
                                                                                                 q̂
                      −ip̂h
                              h
                                  ∗   −ip̂h
                                                         1
                                                            −1           q̂
                                                                              i            1    e− 2
              = JΩ e          f (q̂)e         JΩ JΦ|Ω ∆Φ|Ω ∆Ω 2 e−ip̂h e 2
                                                         2
                                                                          JΩ JΩ|Φ ∆Ω|Φ     2

                                                                                            f (q̂ + h)
                                                                                             q̂
                      −ip̂h
                                    h
                                      ∗      −ip̂h
                                                             1     q̂
                                                                      −ip̂h
                                                                            i   1         e− 2
              = JΩ e        JΩ JΩ|Φ f (q̂)e        JΩ JΦ|Ω ∆Φ|Ω e e
                                                             2     2          ∆Ω|Φ
                                                                                2

                                                                                     f (q̂ + h)
                                                                      "                      #
                                                                                    − 2q̂
                             h                       1    q̂
                                                                  i        1      e
              = eip̂h JΩ|Φ f ∗ (q̂)e−ip̂h JΩ JΦ|Ω ∆Φ|Ω
                                                     2
                                                        e 2 e−ip̂h · ∆Ω|Φ  2
                                                                                                         (A.26)
                                                                               f (q̂ + h)

so that in particular the density matrices are given by,
                                        1                                         1
                        ρΦ̃ = eip̂h ∆Φ|Ω
                                     2
                                         JΩ|Φ JΩ eq̂ g(q̂ − h)JΩ JΦ|Ω ∆Φ|Ω
                                                                       2
                                                                           e−ip̂h                        (A.27)
                                                q̂       q̂
                        ρ′Φ̃ = f (q̂ + h)e ∆−1  2
                                                   ∗
                                            Ω|Φ e f (q̂ + h)
                                                         2                                               (A.28)

again reproducing the expressions from [33].


B     Null surfaces
The identities considered in section 3.2 that are crucial in obtaining the crossed product
gravitational algebras and relating the crossed product entropy to generalized entropy make
extensive use of geometric relations for null surfaces. This appendix summarizes the neces-
sary properties of null surfaces needed to arrive at these identities by way of the canonical
analysis on null surfaces, discussed in appendix C.


B.1    Null surface geometry

We begin by briefly reviewing the geometry of null surfaces, see [68, 135, 136] for additional
details. Let N be a null hypersurface with a null normal la whose norm vanishes on N ,
      N
l · l = 0. We can define a null rigging vector na that satisfies n · l = −1 and n · n = 0, and
with it define a projector onto the null surface

                                                 Πab = δba + na lb .                                      (B.1)

The metric at N then naturally decomposes as

                                            gab = qab + na lb + la nb ,                                   (B.2)

where qab is the degenerate induced metric on N . Additionally, the spacetime volume form
ϵ decomposes as
                                        ϵ = −l ∧ η                                  (B.3)

                                                         67
where
                                          η = −n ∧ µ                                       (B.4)
is the volume form on N , and µ = il η is the degenerate area form that induces a volume
for on horizon cuts. Note that the choice of rigging vector na also allows for an inverse
degenerate metric q ab to be defined, which satisfies q ab nb = q ab lb = 0, q ab qac qbd = qcd .
    The shape operator W ab for the null surface is defined as the projection of ∇a lb onto the
null surface, and decomposes as
                                                                       1
                   W ab = Πcb ∇c la = −knb la + ϖb la + q ac (σcb +       Θqcb )           (B.5)
                                                                      d−2
where k is the inaffinity, ϖb is the Hájíček one-form, σcb is the shear, and Θ is the expansion,
defined by

                                    k = −nb la ∇a lb                                       (B.6)
                                   ϖb = −q cb na ∇c la                                     (B.7)
                                    Θ = ∇a l a − k                                         (B.8)
                                        1              1
                                   σcb = £l qcb −        Θqcb                              (B.9)
                                        2           d−2


B.2     Gaussian null coordinates

Gaussian null coordinates (GNuC) [75, 106, 137] provide a convenient coordinate system for
describing the metric near a null hypersurface N . On such a surface, we take la to be
                                                             N
an affinely parameterized null generator satisfying la ∇a lb = 0, and let v denote the affine
parameter so that la ∇a v = 1. Surfaces of constant v then define a foliation of the null
hypersurface, and we can define a future-directed transverse null rigging vector na orthogonal
to these surfaces and normalized such that n · l = −1. Extending na off of N as an affinely
parameterized null geodesic generator, it can be chosen to satisfy n · n = 0, na ∇a nb = 0, and
∇[a nb] = 0 throughout the open coordinate patch near N . We can furthermore extend la
off of N by requiring [n, l]a = 0. By taking u to be an affine parameter for na with N at
u = 0, coordinates (u, v, y A ) can be chosen such that
                                      a                a
                                  a     ∂           a    ∂
                                 l =         ,    n =          .                         (B.10)
                                       ∂v                ∂u

The metric in this coordinate system takes the form

                    ds2 = −2dudv − u2 Adv 2 + 2uBA dvdy A + qAB dy A dy B                 (B.11)

where A, BA and qAB are functions of the spacetime coordinates. Note in this coordinate
system the relations

                 na = −∇a v,     la = −∇a u + uBa − u2 A∇a v,         l · l = −u2 A       (B.12)

                                               68
hold, where Ba = BA ∇a y A .
   When N is a Killing horizon with bifurcation surface located at u = v = 0, the Killing
vector in these coordinates takes the form [75]

                                          ξ a = κvla − κuna .                                   (B.13)

Additionally, requiring the metric to be invariant under the flow of ξ a leads to the condition
that A, BA , and qAB depend on the coordinates u and v only via their product uv.


B.3     Quasi-Killing vectors

In addition to the global Killing vector ξ a , the analysis of section 3.2 deals extensively with
quasi-Killing vectors, which satisfy Killing’s equation only on the null surface N . A generic
such vector parallel to the horizon generator la can be expressed in terms of a function
τ (v, y A ) as
                                      ζτa = τ la + u∇a τ.                                  (B.14)
The Lie derivative of the metric on N can then be written as
                               N                                          N
                       £ζτ gab = τ £l gab + 2∇(a τ lb) + 2∇(a u∇b) τ = τ £l gab ,               (B.15)

where we have dropped terms proportional to u. Hence we need only verify that £l gab = 0.
Note using the GNuC expressions (B.11), one finds
                                                                  N
                                      £l la = (il dl)a + ∇a (l · l) = 0                         (B.16)
                                   £l na = (il dn)a + ∇a (l · n) = 0.                           (B.17)

Then from the decomposition of the metric gab = qab + na lb + la nb , we find that
                                                          1
                              £l gab = £l qab = σab +        Θqab = 0,                          (B.18)
                                                         d−2
where the last equality uses that a Killing horizon has vanishing expansion and shear. This
then verifies that ζτa is a quasi-Killing vector.
    An additional restriction on the quasi-Killing vector is that it preserve the gauge condi-
tions (C.7) employed in the canonical analysis for the null surface. The third condition there
is nontrivial, since it involves derivatives transverse to the null surface. To check whether
the vector ζτa preserves this condition, we evaluate
       1 a      b c             a
                                    
                                      b c
                                                               
         n ∇a (l l £ζτ gbc ) = n ∇a l l ∇b (τ lc + u∇c τ )
       2                                                                                              
                             = na ∇a lb ∇b τ (l · l) + τ lb lc ∇b lc + lb ∇b ulc ∇c τ + ulb lc ∇b ∇c τ
                            = lb lc ∇b ∇c τ + O(u) = £l £l τ + O(u).                            (B.19)

For this to vanish, the function τ must be at most linear in the coordinate v. This agrees
with the set of null surface symmetries derived in [67].

                                                   69
   It is also useful to derive expressions involving the derivatives of the vectors ζτa , which can
be applied when evaluating gravitational charges in appendix C. These expressions only rely
on the form of the vector (B.14) in GNuC, and do not rely on N being a Killing horizon.
We have
                                                                     N
        la ∇a ζτb = lb la ∇a τ + τ la ∇a lb + la ∇a u∇b τ + ula ∇a ∇b τ = lb la ∇a τ        (B.20)
                                    1                                         N
        lb ∇a ζτb = (l · l)∇a τ + τ ∇a (l · l) + ∇a ulb ∇b τ + ulb ∇a ∇b τ = −la lb ∇b τ    (B.21)
                                    2
                                                             N
          ∇a ζτa = la ∇a τ + τ Θ + ∇a u∇a τ + u∇a ∇a τ = τ Θ.                               (B.22)



C     Canonical formalism and gravitational charges
In this appendix, we provide additional details on the canonical formulation of general rel-
ativity on null hypersurfaces needed to arrive at the identities discussed in section 3.2. We
will largely follow the conventions and notation of [68], see also [67, 69–73] for related re-
cent treatments of the canonical analysis of general relativity on null hypersurfaces. This
canonical analysis is done in the framework of the covariant phase space, see [138–141] for
overviews of this formalism.
    The Lagrangian for the theory consists of a sum of a gravitational and matter contribu-
tions, L = Lg + Lψ , with the gravitational Lagrangian comprised of an Einstein-Hilbert term
and cosmological constant,
                                            1
                                   Lg =         ϵ(R − 2Λ).                             (C.1)
                                         16πGN
The covariant symplectic potential θ = θg + θψ arises from the boundary term appearing in
the variation of the Lagrangian, δL = Eϕ · δϕ + dθ, where ϕ = (gab , ψ) collectively denotes
the full set of dynamical fields, and Eϕ = 0 are the equations of motion. The gravitational
piece is given by
                                      1                              
                             θg =        ϵa... g bc δΓabc − g ac δΓbbc .               (C.2)
                                   16πGN

    When pulled back to a null Cauchy surface N , θg may be decomposed as [68]
                                           N
                                        θg = −δℓ + dβ + E g                                  (C.3)

where the underline denotes the pullback, and

                     1
              ℓ=−         η(Θ + 2k)                                                          (C.4)
                  16πGN
                   1
             β=        g ab δgab µ                                                           (C.5)
                32πGN
                                                                  
             g     1         ab       d−3    ab                    a
            E =        η σ δqab − k +     Θ q δqab − 2(Θna + ϖa )δl .                        (C.6)
                16πGN                 d−2

                                                  70
For the present applications, it is helpful to perform a partial gauge-fixing with respect to
diffeomorphisms tangent to N . The relevant gauge-conditions were considered by Chan-
drasekaran, Flanagan, and Prabhu (CFP) [67], who showed that one can always impose the
conditions that la and la are fixed, la remains null, and the inaffinity of la vanishes, k = 0.
These translate to the following conditions on the variations:
                  N                           N             1                    N
              δla = 0;      gac δlc = −lb δgab = 0;     δk = nb ∇b (la lc δgac ) = 0.        (C.7)
                                                            2
Note that we can satisfy these conditions by gauge fixing to Gaussian null coordinates and
imposing that the only variations of the metric come from variations of A, BA and qAB
appearing in (B.11). With these gauge conditions, the terms appearing in the decomposition
(C.3) simplifty to
                                   1
                            ℓ=−         ηΘ                                                   (C.8)
                                16πGN
                                 1
                           β=        q ab δgab µ                                             (C.9)
                              32πGN
                                                            
                           g     1         ab    d − 3 ab
                          E =        η σ δqab −       Θq δqab .                             (C.10)
                              16πGN              d−2
An additional consequence of the above gauge fixing is that it allows us to define the location
of a horizon cut in a diffeomorphism invariant manner: in Gaussian null coordinates, a surface
at v = λ(y A ) can simply be interpreted as a cut located a given affine distance away from
the bifurcation surface.
   The quantity E = E g + E ψ serves as a symplectic potential current on the null surface,
and hence the integral of its variation defines the symplectic form
                                              Z
                                         Ω=       δE,                               (C.11)
                                                   N

where we are treating δ as an exterior derivative on field space, so that in terms of individual
variations, δE[δ1 ϕ, δ2 ϕ] = δ1 E[δ2 ϕ] − δ2 E[δ1 ϕ]. Note that δE differs from the symplectic form
constructed from the spacetime-covariant current ω = δθ by a total derivative −dδβ. We
can determine the charge associated with a diffeomorphism generated by a vector ξ a parallel
to N by evaluating [68, 69]
                                    Z                            Z              
                   Ω[δϕ, £ξ ϕ] =        d(δMξ − Mδξ − iξ E) +          δCξ − Cδξ             (C.12)
                                   N                            N

where
                                    Mξ = Qξ + iξ ℓ − β[£ξ ϕ],                               (C.13)
Qξ is the covariant Noether potential, which for general relativity evaluates to [140]
                                               1
                                    Qξ = −        ϵa ∇a ξ b ,                               (C.14)
                                             16πGN b...
and Cξ are combinations of the equations of motion comprising the constraints of the theory.

                                                  71
     To satisfy Hamilton’s equation, the right hand side side of (C.12) must take the form of a
total variation. The possible obstructions arise either from field-dependence of the generator
ξ a in the terms Mδξ and Cδξ or from the flux term iξ E evaluated at the asymptotic boundaries
of the null surface ∂N . We verify below that the field dependence for quasi-Killing vectors
on a null surface has vanishing contributions to the fluxes. The remaining obstruction to
integrability comes from iξ E. To handle this term, we impose boundary conditions on the
future horizon that the matter field fluxes go to zero and that the shear is asymptotically
vanishing. Additionally, the requirement that N is an event horizon imposes that the
expansion vanishes in the far future, so examining the form of E g in (C.10) shows that it
vanishes on the future boundary, and hence the full obstruction to integrability vanishes
here.
    Integrability at the past boundary of N is more subtle since Θ is constrained to satisfy
(3.30), and hence cannot vanish at both the past and future boundaries    √ of N unless there is
zero null energy flux. However, when working perturbatively in κ = 32πGN , the expansion
itself is O(κ 2 ), and since the metric variation δqab is O(κ), we find that the flux term coming
from the expansion in E g is suppressed. Thus, in the GN → 0 limit, the expansion term does
not obstruct integrability of the charges, and assuming the shear and matter flux fall off at
the past boundary of N , the full contribution from iξ E vanishes there.
   Hence, we can define the Hamiltonian
                                      Z                  Z
                               Hξ =               Mξ +       Cξ ,                             (C.15)
                                             ∂N          N

which, according to the discussion of integrability above, satisfies
                                        δHξ = Ω[δϕ, £ξ ϕ].                                    (C.16)
The Hamiltonian can also be usefully expressed in terms of a local integral on N by noting
the relation
                                             N
                                  dMξ + Cξ = E[£ξ ϕ],                               (C.17)
which holds when all forms are pulled back to N . In general this equation contains correc-
tions if the vector ξ a is not tangent to N or does not act covariantly on ℓ, as discussed in
detail in [68, 135], but one can show that there is no contribution from the anomalous trans-
formation of ℓ when the vector field ξ a preserves the gauge-fixing conditions (C.7). According
to equation (B.19), this will hold in particular for quasi-Killing vectors ζτa , with τ (v, y A ) con-
taining only linear and constant terms in v. This results in the equivalent expression for the
Hamiltonian                                   Z
                                        Hξ =      E[£ξ ϕ].                                     (C.18)
                                                  N

   The gravitational contribution to Hξ follows directly from the form of E g given in (C.10).
The matter contribution in the simplest cases is directly related to the matter stress tensor.
To arrive at this conclusion, we assume that the matter symplectic potential θψ does not
contain nontrivial terms involving the metric in its decomposition on N , and hence θψ = E ψ .
We can then consider the matter contribution to the Noether current
                                                         N
                                 Jξψ = θψ [£ξ ϕ] − iξ L = E ψ [£ξ ϕ]                          (C.19)

                                                  72
where the second equality holds upon pulling back to N and using that ξ a is tangent to N .
The divergence of the Noether current satisfies

                        dJξψ = −Eψ · £ξ ψ − ϵT(ψ)
                                              ab
                                                  ∇a ξb = dCξψ + Nξψ                   (C.20)

where both Cξψ and Nξψ depend algebraically on ξ a . The Noether identities Nξψ = 0 hold
identically due to diffeomorphism invariance, and hence Jξψ = Cξψ + dQψξ . Again, for most
standard matter theories, Qψξ = 0, and hence the Noether current agrees with the contribu-
tion of the matter terms to the constraint. Examining (C.20), we see that

                            Cξψ = −ϵa... (T(ψ) )ab ξ b + (Eψ terms).                   (C.21)

Together with (C.19) and (C.18), this shows that the matter contribution to the full Hamil-
tonian is given simply by the integral of the matter stress tensor, up to terms that vanish on
shell. Note that for the most general matter theories, one must allow for nonzero values of
δℓψ and β ψ in the decomposition of θψ , and also allow for a nonzero value of Qψξ . These can
be straightforwardly incorporated into the above discussion, but for the remainder of this
work we do not consider these generalizations.
    We now would like to evaluate the gravitational charge potential Mζτ for the vectors
defined by (B.14), which are quasi-Killing vectors of the background spacetime. Using that
ϵ = l ∧ n ∧ µ and the identities (B.20) and (B.21), the Noether potential (C.14) pulled back
to N evaluates to
                        N       1                                1
                    Qζτ = −         (la nb − na lb )∇a ζτb µ =      µla ∇a τ.          (C.22)
                              16πGN                            8πGN

Additionally, from the definitions (C.8) and (C.9) and the identity (B.22), the remaining
terms in Mζτ are given by

                                     N   1                  1
                                 iζτ ℓ = −   iζτ ηΘ = −        µτ Θ                    (C.23)
                                       16πGN             16πGN
                                   N     1                   1
                      −β[£ζτ gab ] = −       ∇a ζτa µ = −       µτ Θ.                  (C.24)
                                       16πGN              16πGN
This results in the expression

                                         N     1                 
                                  Mζτ =           µ l a ∇a τ − τ Θ ,                   (C.25)
                                             8πGN

consistent with the expressions in CFP [67].
    Finally, we must also verify that the field-dependence in the vector ζτa does not spoil
integrability of the charge. Given the expression (B.14) for the quasi-Killing vector, we
require that δτ = 0, and by gauge fixing to Gaussian null coordinates we can ensure that
δla = 0 and δu = 0 in a neighborhood of N . This leads to

                                         δζτa = −uδgbc g ba ∇c τ.                      (C.26)

                                                   73
Hence δζτa vanishes on N , and its covariant derivative there does as well, since
                               N
                        ∇a δζτb = −∇a uδgbc g ab ∇c τ = lb δgbc ∇c τ = 0,            (C.27)

where we have used (B.12) and (C.7) evaluated at N . Since the possible obstructions to
integrability Mδζτ and Cδζτ appearing in (C.12) involve only δζτa and ∇a δζτb at N , we see
that these terms vanish.



References
  [1] J. D. Bekenstein, Black holes and the second law, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 4 (1972)
      737–740.

  [2] J. D. Bekenstein, Black Holes and Entropy, Phys. Rev. D 7 (1973) 2333–2346.

  [3] R. D. Sorkin, 1983 paper on entanglement entropy: “On the Entropy of the Vacuum
      outside a Horizon”, [arXiv:1402.3589].

  [4] L. Bombelli, R. K. Koul, J. Lee and R. D. Sorkin, Quantum source of entropy for
      black holes, Phys. Rev. D 34 (1986) 373–383.

  [5] M. Srednicki, Entropy and area, Physical Review Letters 71 (1993) 666–669.

  [6] V. Frolov and I. Novikov, Dynamical origin of the entropy of a black hole, Physical
      Review D 48 (1993) 4545–4551.

  [7] L. Susskind and J. Uglum, Black hole entropy in canonical quantum gravity and su-
      perstring theory, Phys. Rev. D 50 (1994) 2700–2711. [arXiv:hep-th/9401070].

  [8] T. Jacobson, Black hole entropy and induced gravity, [arXiv:gr-qc/9404039].

  [9] F. Larsen and F. Wilczek, Renormalization of black hole entropy and of the grav-
      itational coupling constant, Nucl. Phys. B 458 (1996) 249–266. [arXiv:hep-th/
      9506066].

 [10] S. N. Solodukhin, Entanglement entropy of black holes, Living Rev. Rel. 14 (2011) 8.
      [arXiv:1104.3712].

 [11] J. H. Cooperman and M. A. Luty, Renormalization of Entanglement Entropy and the
      Gravitational Effective Action, JHEP 12 (2014) 045. [arXiv:1302.1878].

 [12] R. Bousso, Z. Fisher, S. Leichenauer and A. C. Wall, Quantum focusing conjecture,
      Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) 064044. [arXiv:1506.02669].

 [13] E. Bianchi and R. C. Myers, On the Architecture of Spacetime Geometry, Class.
      Quant. Grav. 31 (2014) 214002. [arXiv:1212.5183].

                                               74
[14] R. C. Myers, R. Pourhasan and M. Smolkin, On Spacetime Entanglement, JHEP 06
     (2013) 013. [arXiv:1304.2030].

[15] S. W. Hawking, Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes, Phys. Rev. Lett.
     26 (1971) 1344–1346.

[16] S. W. Hawking, Black holes in general relativity, Commun. Math. Phys. 25 (1972)
     152–166.

[17] A. C. Wall, A Survey of Black Hole Thermodynamics, [arXiv:1804.10610].

[18] R. Bousso, Z. Fisher, J. Koeller, S. Leichenauer and A. C. Wall, Proof of the Quan-
     tum Null Energy Condition, Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) 024017. [arXiv:1509.02542].

[19] S. Balakrishnan, T. Faulkner, Z. U. Khandker and H. Wang, A General Proof of the
     Quantum Null Energy Condition, JHEP 09 (2019) 020. [arXiv:1706.09432].

[20] F. Ceyhan and T. Faulkner, Recovering the QNEC from the ANEC, Commun. Math.
     Phys. 377 (2020) 999–1045. [arXiv:1812.04683].

[21] S. Ryu and T. Takayanagi, Aspects of holographic entanglement entropy, J. High En-
     ergy Phys. 2006 (2006) 045.

[22] S. Ryu and T. Takayanagi, Holographic derivation of entanglement entropy from
     AdS/CFT, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 181602. [arXiv:hep-th/0603001].

[23] V. E. Hubeny, M. Rangamani and T. Takayanagi, A Covariant holographic entangle-
     ment entropy proposal, JHEP 07 (2007) 062. [arXiv:0705.0016].

[24] A. Lewkowycz and J. Maldacena, Generalized gravitational entropy, JHEP 08 (2013)
     090. [arXiv:1304.4926].

[25] T. Faulkner, A. Lewkowycz and J. Maldacena, Quantum corrections to holographic
     entanglement entropy, JHEP 11 (2013) 074. [arXiv:1307.2892].

[26] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, Quantum Extremal Surfaces: Holographic Entan-
     glement Entropy beyond the Classical Regime, JHEP 01 (2015) 073. [arXiv:
     1408.3203].

[27] S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, Causal connectability between quantum systems and the
     black hole interior in holographic duality, Phys. Rev. D 108 (2023) 086019. [arXiv:
     2110.05497].

[28] S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, Emergent Times in Holographic Duality, Phys. Rev. D
     108 (2023) 086020. [arXiv:2112.12156].

[29] E. Witten, Gravity and the crossed product, JHEP 10 (2022) 008. [arXiv:2112.
     12828].

                                           75
[30] V. Chandrasekaran, G. Penington and E. Witten, Large N algebras and generalized
     entropy, JHEP 04 (2023) 009. [arXiv:2209.10454].

[31] V. Chandrasekaran, R. Longo, G. Penington and E. Witten, An algebra of observ-
     ables for de Sitter space, JHEP 02 (2023) 082. [arXiv:2206.10780].

[32] J. Kudler-Flam, S. Leutheusser and G. Satishchandran, Generalized Black Hole En-
     tropy is von Neumann Entropy, [arXiv:2309.15897].

[33] K. Jensen, J. Sorce and A. J. Speranza, Generalized entropy for general subregions in
     quantum gravity, JHEP 12 (2023) 020. [arXiv:2306.01837].

[34] S. Leutheusser and H. Liu, Subalgebra-subregion duality: emergence of space and
     time in holography, [arXiv:2212.13266].

[35] E. Bahiru, A. Belin, K. Papadodimas, G. Sarosi and N. Vardian, State-dressed local
     operators in AdS/CFT, [arXiv:2209.06845].

[36] E. Bahiru, A. Belin, K. Papadodimas, G. Sarosi and N. Vardian, Holography and
     Localization of Information in Quantum Gravity, [arXiv:2301.08753].

[37] T. Faulkner and M. Li, Asymptotically isometric codes for holography, [arXiv:2211.
     12439].

[38] A. C. Wall, A proof of the generalized second law for rapidly changing fields and ar-
     bitrary horizon slices, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 104049. [arXiv:1105.3445].

[39] H. Casini, E. Teste and G. Torroba, Modular Hamiltonians on the null plane and
     the Markov property of the vacuum state, J. Phys. A 50 (2017) 364001. [arXiv:
     1703.10656].

[40] E. Witten, Princeton physics 539, lecture 19, November 17, 2022. https://phy.
     princeton.edu/academics/graduate-program/graduate-course-recordings.

[41] H. J. Borchers, The CPT-theorem in two-dimensional theories of local observables,
     Communications in Mathematical Physics 143 (1992) 315–332.

[42] H.-J. Borchers, On revolutionizing quantum field theory with Tomita’s modular the-
     ory, Journal of Mathematical Physics 41 (2000) 3604–3673.

[43] H. W. Wiesbrock, Half sided modular inclusions of von Neumann algebras, Commun.
     Math. Phys. 157 (1993) 83–92.

[44] U. Haagerup, Operator-valued weights in von Neumann algebras. I, J. Functional
     Analysis 32 (1979) 175–206.

[45] U. Haagerup, Operator-valued weights in von Neumann algebras. II, J. Functional
     Analysis 33 (1979) 339–361.

                                            76
[46] M. Ali and V. Suneeta, A local Generalized second law in crossed product construc-
     tions, [arXiv:2404.00718].

[47] K. Fredenhagen, On the modular structure of local algebras of observables, Quantum
     Field Theory: A Selection of Papers in Memoriam Kurt Symanzik (1985) 79–89.

[48] D. Buchholz and R. Verch, Scaling algebras and renormalization group in algebraic
     quantum field theory, Reviews in Mathematical Physics 7 (1995) 1195–1239.

[49] R. Haag, Local quantum physics: Fields, particles, algebras. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
     1992.

[50] R. Bousso, H. Casini, Z. Fisher and J. Maldacena, Entropy on a null surface for
     interacting quantum field theories and the Bousso bound, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015)
     084030. [arXiv:1406.4545].

[51] K. Schmüdgen, Unbounded Self-adjoint Operators on Hilbert Space. Graduate Texts
     in Mathematics. Springer, Dordrecht, 2012.

[52] R. Haag, Bemerkungen zum nahwirkungsprinzip in der qantenphysik, Annalen der
     Physik 466 (1963) 29–34.

[53] K. Fredenhagen and J. Hertel, Local algebras of observables and pointlike localized
     fields, Communications in Mathematical Physics 80 (1981) 555 – 561.

[54] T. A. Roman, Quantum Stress Energy Tensors and the Weak Energy Condition,
     Phys. Rev. D 33 (1986) 3526–3533.

[55] A. Borde, Geodesic focusing, energy conditions and singularities, Class. Quant. Grav.
     4 (1987) 343–356.

[56] T. A. Roman, On the ‘Averaged Weak Energy Condition’ and Penrose’s Singularity
     Theorem, Phys. Rev. D 37 (1988) 546–548.

[57] T. Faulkner, R. G. Leigh, O. Parrikar and H. Wang, Modular Hamiltonians for De-
     formed Half-Spaces and the Averaged Null Energy Condition, JHEP 09 (2016) 038.
     [arXiv:1605.08072].

[58] T. Hartman, S. Kundu and A. Tajdini, Averaged Null Energy Condition from
     Causality, JHEP 07 (2017) 066. [arXiv:1610.05308].

[59] P. Kravchuk and D. Simmons-Duffin, Light-ray operators in conformal field theory,
     JHEP 11 (2018) 102. [arXiv:1805.00098].

[60] R. M. Wald and U. Yurtsever, General proof of the averaged null energy condition
     for a massless scalar field in two-dimensional curved space-time, Phys. Rev. D 44
     (1991) 403–416.

[61] R. Penrose, R. D. Sorkin and E. Woolgar, A Positive mass theorem based on the fo-
     cusing and retardation of null geodesics, [arXiv:gr-qc/9301015].

                                            77
[62] N. Graham and K. D. Olum, Achronal averaged null energy condition, Phys. Rev. D
     76 (2007) 064001. [arXiv:0705.3193].

[63] E. Witten, Light Rays, Singularities, and All That, Rev. Mod. Phys. 92 (2020)
     045004. [arXiv:1901.03928].

[64] E.-A. Kontou and K. Sanders, Energy conditions in general relativity and quantum
     field theory, Class. Quant. Grav. 37 (2020) 193001. [arXiv:2003.01815].

[65] S. J. Summers and R. Verch, Modular inclusion, the Hawking temperature and quan-
     tum field theory in curved space-time, Lett. Math. Phys. 37 (1996) 145–158.

[66] G. L. Sewell, Quantum fields on manifolds: PCT and gravitationally induced thermal
     states, Annals Phys. 141 (1982) 201–224.

[67] V. Chandrasekaran, E. E. Flanagan and K. Prabhu, Symmetries and charges of gen-
     eral relativity at null boundaries, JHEP 11 (2018) 125. [arXiv:1807.11499].

[68] V. Chandrasekaran and A. J. Speranza, Anomalies in gravitational charge algebras of
     null boundaries and black hole entropy, JHEP 01 (2021) 137. [arXiv:2009.10739].

[69] V. Chandrasekaran, E. E. Flanagan, I. Shehzad and A. J. Speranza, A general
     framework for gravitational charges and holographic renormalization, Int. J. Mod.
     Phys. A 37 (2022) 2250105. [arXiv:2111.11974].

[70] L. Ciambelli, L. Freidel and R. G. Leigh, Null Raychaudhuri: canonical structure and
     the dressing time, JHEP 01 (2024) 166. [arXiv:2309.03932].

[71] G. Odak, A. Rignon-Bret and S. Speziale, General gravitational charges on null hy-
     persurfaces, JHEP 12 (2023) 038. [arXiv:2309.03854].

[72] V. Chandrasekaran and E. E. Flanagan, Horizon phase spaces in general relativity,
     [arXiv:2309.03871].

[73] H. Adami, D. Grumiller, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, V. Taghiloo, H. Yavartanoo and
     C. Zwikel, Null boundary phase space: slicings, news & memory, JHEP 11 (2021)
     155. [arXiv:2110.04218].

[74] S. Hollands, R. M. Wald and V. G. Zhang, The Entropy of Dynamical Black Holes,
     [arXiv:2402.00818].

[75] S. Hollands and R. M. Wald, Stability of Black Holes and Black Branes, Commun.
     Math. Phys. 321 (2013) 629–680. [arXiv:1201.0463].

[76] M. R. Visser and Z. Yan, Properties of Dynamical Black Hole Entropy, [arXiv:
     2403.07140].

[77] C. P. Burgess, Quantum Gravity in Everyday Life: General Relativity as an Effective
     Field Theory, Living Reviews in Relativity 7 (2004) 5. [arXiv:gr-qc/0311082].

                                           78
[78] J. F. Donoghue, The effective field theory treatment of quantum gravity, AIP Conf.
     Proc. 1483 (2012) 73–94. [arXiv:1209.3511].

[79] H. Araki, Relative entropy of states of von Neumann algebras, Publ. Res. Inst. Math.
     Sci. 11 (1975/76) 809–833.

[80] A. Uhlmann, Relative entropy and the Wigner-Yanase-Dyson-Lieb concavity in an
     interpolation theory, Comm. Math. Phys. 54 (1977) 21–32.

[81] M. Ohya and D. Petz, Quantum entropy and its use. Springer-Verlag Berlin, 1993.

[82] C. Dappiaggi, V. Moretti and N. Pinamonti, Rigorous construction and Hadamard
     property of the Unruh state in Schwarzschild spacetime, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 15
     (2011) 355–447.

[83] H.-J. Borchers, Field operators as C ∞ functions in spacelike directions, Nuovo Ci-
     mento (10) 33 (1964) 1600–1613.

[84] E. Witten, Algebras, Regions, and Observers, [arXiv:2303.02837].

[85] H. Borchers, Half-sided translations in connection with modular groups as a tool in
     quantum field theory, Preprint ESI 446 (1997) .

[86] M. Takesaki, Conditional expectations in von Neumann algebras, J. Functional Anal-
     ysis 9 (1972) 306–321.

[87] M. Takesaki, Theory of operator algebras. II , vol. 125 of Encyclopaedia of Mathemat-
     ical Sciences. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003.

[88] R. Longo, Solution of the factorial Stone-Weierstrass conjecture. An application of
     the theory of standard split W ∗ -inclusions, Invent. Math. 76 (1984) 145–155.

[89] J. Haláček and T. Ledvinka, The analytic conformal compactification of the
     Schwarzschild spacetime, Class. Quant. Grav. 31 (2014) 015007. [arXiv:1401.1337].

[90] R. M. Wald, General Relativity. Chicago Univ. Pr., Chicago, USA, 1984.

[91] M. O. Fumio Hiai and M. Tsukada, Sufficiency, kms condition and relative entropy
     in von neumann algebras, Pac. J. Math. 96 (1981) 99–109.

[92] D. Petz, Properties of the relative entropy of states of von neumann algebras, Acta.
     Math. Hung. 47 (1986) 65–72.

[93] D. Petz, On certain properties of the relative entropy of states of operator algebras,
     Math. Z. 206 (1991) 351–361.

[94] J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, Path-integral derivation of black-hole radiance,
     Phys. Rev. D 13 (1976) 2188–2203.

                                             79
 [95] A. Ashtekar and M. Streubel, Symplectic Geometry of Radiative Modes and Con-
      served Quantities at Null Infinity, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series
      A 376 (1981) 585–607.

 [96] R. M. Wald and A. Zoupas, A General definition of ‘conserved quantities’ in gen-
      eral relativity and other theories of gravity, Phys. Rev. D 61 (2000) 084027. [arXiv:
      gr-qc/9911095].

 [97] A. M. Grant, K. Prabhu and I. Shehzad, The Wald–Zoupas prescription for asymp-
      totic charges at null infinity in general relativity, Class. Quant. Grav. 39 (2022)
      085002. [arXiv:2105.05919].

 [98] H. Bondi, M. G. J. van der Burg and A. W. K. Metzner, Gravitational waves in gen-
      eral relativity. 7. Waves from axisymmetric isolated systems, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.
      A 269 (1962) 21–52.

 [99] R. K. Sachs, Gravitational waves in general relativity. 8. Waves in asymptotically flat
      space-times, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 270 (1962) 103–126.

[100] A. Ashtekar and A. Magnon-Ashtekar, Energy-Momentum in General Relativity,
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 43 (1979) 181–184.

[101] K. Prabhu, G. Satishchandran and R. M. Wald, Infrared finite scattering theory in
      quantum field theory and quantum gravity, Phys. Rev. D 106 (2022) 066005. [arXiv:
      2203.14334].

[102] R. Longo and E. Witten, A note on continuous entropy, Pure Appl. Math. Quart. 19
      (2023) 2501–2523. [arXiv:2202.03357].

[103] D. L. Jafferis and L. Lamprou, Inside the hologram: reconstructing the bulk ob-
      server’s experience, JHEP 03 (2022) 084. [arXiv:2009.04476].

[104] J. de Boer, D. L. Jafferis and L. Lamprou, On black hole interior reconstruction, sin-
      gularities and the emergence of time, [arXiv:2211.16512].

[105] R. C. Myers and M. J. Perry, Black Holes in Higher Dimensional Space-Times, An-
      nals Phys. 172 (1986) 304.

[106] S. Hollands, A. Ishibashi and R. M. Wald, A Higher dimensional stationary rotat-
      ing black hole must be axisymmetric, Commun. Math. Phys. 271 (2007) 699–722.
      [arXiv:gr-qc/0605106].

[107] S. W. Hawking, Particle Creation by Black Holes, Commun. Math. Phys. 43 (1975)
      199–220.

[108] R. M. Wald, On Particle Creation by Black Holes, Commun. Math. Phys. 45 (1975)
      9–34.

                                             80
[109] B. S. Kay and R. M. Wald, Theorems on the Uniqueness and Thermal Properties of
      Stationary, Nonsingular, Quasifree States on Space-Times with a Bifurcate Killing
      Horizon, Phys. Rept. 207 (1991) 49–136.

[110] J. Sorce, Analyticity and the Unruh effect: a study of local modular flow, [arXiv:
      2403.18937].

[111] V. P. Frolov and K. S. Thorne, Renormalized Stress - Energy Tensor Near the Hori-
      zon of a Slowly Evolving, Rotating Black Hole, Phys. Rev. D 39 (1989) 2125–2154.

[112] W. G. Unruh, Notes on black hole evaporation, Phys. Rev. D 14 (1976) 870.

[113] R. M. Wald, Quantum Field Theory in Curved Space-Time and Black Hole Thermo-
      dynamics. Chicago Lectures in Physics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL,
      1995.

[114] H. Araki and L. Zsidó, Extension of the structure theorem of Borchers and its appli-
      cation to half-sided modular inclusions, Rev. Math. Phys. 17 (2005) 491–543.

[115] J. Kudler-Flam, S. Leutheusser, A. A. Rahman, G. Satishchandran and A. J. Sper-
      anza, A covariant regulator for entanglement entropy: proofs of the Bekenstein bound
      and QNEC, [arXiv:2312.07646].

[116] M. Junge, R. Renner, D. Sutter, M. M. Wilde and A. Winter, Universal Recovery
      Maps and Approximate Sufficiency of Quantum Relative Entropy, Annales Henri
      Poincare 19 (2018) 2955–2978. [arXiv:1509.07127].

[117] T. Faulkner, S. Hollands, B. Swingle and Y. Wang, Approximate Recovery and Rel-
      ative Entropy I: General von Neumann Subalgebras, Commun. Math. Phys. 389
      (2022) 349–397. [arXiv:2006.08002].

[118] T. Faulkner and S. Hollands, Approximate recoverability and relative entropy II: 2-
      positive channels of general von Neumann algebras, Lett. Math. Phys. 112 (2022) 26.
      [arXiv:2010.05513].

[119] L. Accardi and C. Cecchini, Conditional expectations in von neumann algebras and a
      theorem of takesaki, Journal of Functional Analysis 45 (1982) 245–273.

[120] D. Petz, A dual in von Neumann algebras with weights, The Quarterly Journal of
      Mathematics 35 (1984) 475–483.

[121] B. Simon, Loewner’s theorem on monotone matrix functions. Springer, 2019.

[122] F. Kubo and T. Ando, Means of positive linear operators, Mathematische Annalen
      246 (1980) 205–224.

[123] K. Furuya, N. Lashkari and S. Ouseph, Monotonic multi-state quantum f-divergences,
      J. Math. Phys. 64 (2023) 042203. [arXiv:2103.09893].

                                             81
[124] S. Doplicher and R. Longo, Standard and split inclusions of von Neumann algebras,
      Invent. Math. 75 (1984) 493–536.

[125] R. Longo, Y. Tanimoto and Y. Ueda, Free products in AQFT, Annales Inst. Fourier
      69 (2019) 1229–1258. [arXiv:1706.06070].

[126] A. Connes, Une classification des facteurs de type III, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup.
      (4) 6 (1973) 133–252.

[127] I. E. Segal, A note on the concept of entropy, Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics
      9 (1960) 623–629.

[128] A. Rignon-Bret, Second law from the Noether current on null hypersurfaces, Phys.
      Rev. D 108 (2023) 044069. [arXiv:2303.07262].

[129] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, Decoding the Apparent Horizon: Coarse-Grained
      Holographic Entropy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) 211301. [arXiv:1706.02038].

[130] N. Engelhardt and A. C. Wall, Coarse Graining Holographic Black Holes, JHEP 05
      (2019) 160. [arXiv:1806.01281].

[131] B. Freivogel and D. Krommydas, The Smeared Null Energy Condition, JHEP 12
      (2018) 067. [arXiv:1807.03808].

[132] J. R. Fliss and B. Freivogel, Semi-local Bounds on Null Energy in QFT, SciPost
      Phys. 12 (2022) 084. [arXiv:2108.06068].

[133] J. R. Fliss, B. Freivogel and E.-A. Kontou, The double smeared null energy condi-
      tion, SciPost Phys. 14 (2023) 024. [arXiv:2111.05772].

[134] E. Witten, APS Medal for Exceptional Achievement in Research: Invited article on
      entanglement properties of quantum field theory, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90 (2018) 045003.
      [arXiv:1803.04993].

[135] V. Chandrasekaran, E. E. Flanagan, I. Shehzad and A. J. Speranza, Brown-York
      charges at null boundaries, JHEP 01 (2022) 029. [arXiv:2109.11567].

[136] E. Gourgoulhon and J. L. Jaramillo, A 3+1 perspective on null hypersurfaces and
      isolated horizons, Phys. Rept. 423 (2006) 159–294. [arXiv:gr-qc/0503113].

[137] R. Penrose, Techniques of differential topology in relativity. Society for Industrial
      and Applied Mathematics, 1972.

[138] C. Crnkovic and E. Witten, Covariant description of canonical formalism in geomet-
      rical theories, in Three Hundred Years of Gravitation (S. W. Hawking and W. Is-
      rael, eds.), ch. 16, pp. 676–684. Cambridge University Press, 1987.

[139] J. Lee and R. M. Wald, Local symmetries and constraints, J. Math. Phys. 31 (1990)
      725–743.

                                              82
[140] V. Iyer and R. M. Wald, Some properties of Noether charge and a proposal for dy-
      namical black hole entropy, Phys. Rev. D 50 (1994) 846–864. [arXiv:gr-qc/
      9403028].

[141] D. Harlow and J.-Q. Wu, Covariant phase space with boundaries, JHEP 10 (2020)
      146. [arXiv:1906.08616].




                                           83
