                                                     The Dark Dimension and the Swampland
arXiv:2205.12293v3 [hep-th] 3 Mar 2023




                                         Miguel Montero1 , Cumrun Vafa1 and Irene Valenzuela2,3
                                          1
                                            Jefferson Physical Laboratory, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
                                          2
                                            Instituto de Fı́sica Teórica UAM-CSIC and Departamento de Fı́sica Teórica, Universidad Autónoma
                                          de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain
                                          3
                                            CERN, Theoretical Physics Department, 1211 Meyrin, Switzerland
                                          E-mail: mmontero@g.harvard.edu, vafa@g.harvard.edu,
                                          irene.valenzuela@cern.ch

                                         Abstract: Motivated by principles from the Swampland program, which characterize re-
                                         quirements for a consistent UV completion of quantum gravity, combined with observa-
                                         tional data, we are led to a unique corner of the quantum gravity landscape. In partic-
                                         ular, using the Distance/Duality conjecture and the smallness of dark energy, we predict
                                         the existence of a light tower of states and a unique extra mesoscopic dimension of length
                                                 1
                                         l ∼ Λ− 4 ∼ 10−6 m, with extra massless fermions propagating on it. This automatically
                                         leads to a candidate for a tower of sterile neutrinos, and an associated active neutrino mass
                                                              1   −2
                                         scale mν ∼ hHi2 Λ− 12 Mpl 3 . Moreover, assuming the mechanism for stabilization of this dark
                                         dimension leads to similar masses for active and sterile neutrinos we are led to the predic-
                                                                          1   1
                                         tion of a Higgs vev hHi ∼ Λ 6 Mpl3 . Another prediction of the scenario is a species scale
                                                 1   2
                                         M̂ ∼ Λ 12 Mpl3 ∼ 109 − 1010 GeV , corresponding to the higher-dimensional Planck scale. This
                                         energy scale may be related to the resolution of the instability of the Higgs effective potential
                                         present at a scale of ∼ 1011 GeV . We also speculate about the interplay between this energy
                                         scale and the GZK limit on ultra-high energy cosmic rays.
Contents

1 Introduction                                                           2

2 Some Swampland Principles                                              3

3 Swampland criteria and the prediction of the Dark Dimension            6

4 Realization in F-theory                                                9

5 Further phenomenological predictions of the dark dimension scenario   11




                                    –1–
1   Introduction

Naturalness issues, including the hierarchy problem as well as the smallness of the dark
energy, continue to be major puzzles for theoretical physics. The usual notion of naturalness
in quantum field theories assumes that including quantum gravity in the mix does not lead
to a dramatic modification of this view. However the Swampland program [1] (see [2–4] for
reviews), motivated from lessons learned from string theory, challenges this perspective and
has led to a dramatic reformulation of the meaning of naturalness in the context of quantum
gravitational theories and to strong restrictions on EFT’s consistent with quantum gravity.
     In this note we point out that some of the basic ideas of the Swampland program, com-
bined with certain observational data, naturally lead us to a particular corner of the string
landscape, corresponding to an asymptotic region of the field space. The cosmological hier-
archy, namely the smallness of dark energy in Planck units, is the main driver of this. By
Swampland considerations, this asymptotic region is necessarily accompanied by a light tower
of states which, combined with observational data, lead to the prediction of a single extra
mesoscopic dimension of length l ∼ λΛ−1/4 ∼ 1 µm, where Λ is the cosmological constant and
we estimate λ ∼ 10−1 − 10−3 . Moreover combined with other observational data this leads
to the identification of a tower of sterile neutrinos with mass scale mνs ∼ λ−1 Λ1/4 ∼ 1 eV ,
                                                        2/3
and the emergence of a new scale M̂ ∼ λ−1/3 Λ1/12 Mpl ∼ 109 − 1010 GeV , where new tower
of matter states charged under Standard Model gauge fields emerge and gravity becomes
strongly coupled. This is tantalizingly close to the scale of 1011 GeV where the Higgs poten-
tial is believed to develop instability; in our setup the tower charged under Standard Model
gauge fields will lead to its modification and presumably also stability (assuming that is also
related to the scale of supersymmetry breaking) as we will explain. Absence of strong mass
hierarchies in the neutrino sector, and more specifically requiring that active neutrinos and
                                                                                       1/3
sterile neutrinos not to have very different masses leads to mH ∼ y −1 λ−2/3 Λ1/6 Mpl (with
y ∼ 10−2 − 10−3 denoting the coupling of Standard Model fields to KK modes). Thus not
only the hierarchy, the neutrino mass scale and the dark energy have been connected together
through consistency principles of quantum gravity, but we also have a prediction of a new
physical scale M̂ ∼ 109 − 1010 GeV .
     The notion of bringing down the Planck scale/string scale down to near the weak scale
(by considering large extra dimensions) was considered in [5–9]. However the motivation
and the results in these works are rather different from ours. In particular the aim in these
works was to solve the electroweak hierarchy problem through unification of weak scale with
a higher dimensional Planck scale in the TeV range. This in particular originally led to n ≥ 2
large extra dimensions in the scenario studied in [6] (and current bounds are much more
stringent, leading to n ≥ 4 for typical extra dimensions of size less than 10−12 m [10]). We are
instead motivated by the existence of small dark energy and other experimental observations
to predict exactly one mesoscopic dimension in the micron range. In other words, we tie
the existence of a large extra dimension to the cosmological hierarchy problem rather than
the electroweak one. However, interestingly, the weak scale hierarchy also ends up being




                                             –2–
related to the dark energy being small, as we will discuss later in this paper. While there
has been other works suggesting relations between dark energy and large extra dimensions
(see e.g.[11–13]) this relation has not been connected to the requirement for consistency of
quantum gravity as predicted by the Swampland criteria that we explore in this work.
     The organization of this paper is as follows: In section 2 we discuss some of the main
criteria that we will use from the Swampland program. In section 3 we use these to explain
why this leads to a single dark dimension of micron length scale and the emergence of 109 −1010
GeV as a new fundamental scale in physics. In section 4 we discuss possible realization of
this scenario in string theory via F-theory compactifications. In section 5 we discuss further
phenomenological predictions of this model.

2   Some Swampland Principles

One of the main, well-tested Swampland conditions is the distance/duality conjecture [14],
which states that at large distance in field space φ we get an exponentially light tower of
states with mass m ∼ exp(−αφ) where α ∼ O(1) in Planck units. This light tower of states
is weakly coupled and leads to a dual description of the theory. Moreover, due to the tower
of light states, there will be a maximal energy cut-off at which any local QFT description
breaks down and quantum gravity becomes important. This is the so-called “species scale”
[15, 16]. Thus to each tower we can associate two mass scales: m, which is the mass scale of
states in the tower and Λsp which is the scale local QFT description breaks down. The value
of this quantum gravity cut-off depends on the nature of the tower.
     A priori, the tower of states could have any microscopic origin. However, only two
cases have ever been encountered so far in all known asymptotic limits of string theory
compactifications.

    • A tower of string excitation modes. Due to the exponential degeneracy of states, the
      species scale is near the string scale Λsp ∼ m, where one hits the first higher spin state.
      The theory is still weakly coupled to gravity at that scale, but local QFT breaks down
      due to the presence of higher spin states.

    • A Kaluza-Klein tower signaling decompactification. One or more extra dimensions open
      up at the scale m of the tower, and the physics can still be described by a QFT in higher
      dimensions until we reach the species scale, which in this case corresponds to the Planck
      scale of the higher dimensional theory. This is given (for 4 macroscopic dimensions) by

                                                           n      2
                                   M̂ ≡ Λsp = Mpl,n = m n+2 Mpl2+n                          (2.1)

      where n is the number of effective dimensions decompactifying. The physics becomes
      strongly coupled to gravity beyond this scale, so that it cannot be described by effective
      field theory.




                                              –3–
Based on all the known examples from string theory it was conjecture in [17, 18] that these
are indeed the two only possibilities in quantum gravity (the “Emergent String Conjecture”).
     Distance conjecture has also been studied in the context of AdS or dS vacua and it has
been argued in [19] that the natural distance scale in field space is proportional to log(1/|Λ|)
as Λ itself can be viewed in quasi-static case as being parameterized by a field leading to a
generalized notion of distance. This leads to a tower of light states

                                           m ∼ |Λ|α .                                        (2.2)

Even though the Swampland argument is the same in the dS or AdS cases, the AdS case is
supported by a far larger amount of evidence in string theory. Nevertheless, we will assume
this continues to hold in dS as well, as was originally argued. Note that the dS distance
conjecture is in a sense a ‘solution’ to the cosmological constant problem. Because the above
relation can be reinterpreted as
                                                   1
                                             Λ ∼ mα                                      (2.3)

This in particular implies that as m → 0, we should have Λ → 0. In particular the massive
states naively seem not to contribute to the cosmological constant. From EFT we may have
expected to have
                                                    1
                                      Λ ∼ Λ0 + A m α                                (2.4)

where Λ0 would be the contribution of all the heavy modes. We are seeing that the distance
conjecture amounts to saying that Λ0 = 0.
     To gain insight, and more confidence, in the dS version of the distance conjecture, let us
check how this works in the few cases that we are able to check in string theory. Consider
the limit of vanishing string coupling g = 0. In this case the tower of light states is the string
states which in the strict limit lead to m = 0. So in this case we should get the vanishing
of the cosmological constant. Indeed we know this is true in all the string theories, as at the
tree level cosmological constant is zero. This is not because of supersymmetry or any magical
boson/fermion cancellation. It is even true in bosonic string theory. One way to see how this
arises is to note that the contribution of sphere amplitude is always divided by the volume
of the symmetry group which at genus 0 is the conformal group SL(2, C)), and so we end up
with
                                                K
                                    Λ0 =                 = 0,                                (2.5)
                                          Vol(SL(2, C))
since the Vol(SL(2, C) = ∞. So the conformal invariance of string theory is responsible for
this magical cancellation!
     This magic continues at higher loops as well. Consider the example of the non-supersymmetric
O(16) × O(16) heterotic strings [20, 21]. In this case the leading non-vanishing contribution
to the energy at weak string coupling arises from one loop string effect, leading to V ∼ m10
where m is the string scale. Indeed at weak coupling, string excitations form a light tower.
Again it seems surprising that the more massive string excitations, or non-perturbative mas-




                                              –4–
sive branes (such as the NS 5-brane) do not overwhelm the light state contributions. Again
the remenant of conformal symmetry which at 1-loop is the SL(2, Z) symmetry known as
modular invariance is what shuts off the contribution of higher states to the one-loop vacuum
energy energy. In particular, the contributions of massive string excitations of masses mi to
the one-loop vacuum energy, which are expected to be of the form
                                              Z ∞
                                                               m2i s
                                                                    
                                    X
                                           Fi       ds
                        V1-loop ∼ −    (−1)            exp −           ,                  (2.6)
                                               Λ−2  s6           2
                                      i         UV



are cutoff at the Schwinger parameter s ∼ m−2 s due to modular invariance [22]. Here (−1)
                                                                                          Fi

is the fermion number of each particle species in the sum. This makes the high energy cutoff
scale ΛU V (the species bound) equal to the string scale ms . Note that the reason for this
cutoff is not that at higher mass scales string perturbation breaks down, because this does
not happen until we get to very high masses ms /g. So it is magical and surprising from the
EFT point of view that the string states with masses in the range
                                                        ms
                                     O(1) · ms < m <                                         (2.7)
                                                        g

do not seem to play a major role in determining the vacuum energy. We can view the modular
invariance shutting off of the more massive stringy excitations as trying to avoid redundancy
of counting the same states more than once. Similarly the fact that at weak string coupling
the non-perturbative branes do not contribute to vacuume energy can be attributed to the fact
that they can be viewed as composite objects made of light strings and it would be redundant
to add the extra contributions. A field-theoretic analog of this effect is the fact that monopoles
do not run in loops at weak coupling, even if they are stable particles. In other words both
supressions may be viewed as trying to avoid overcounting the contribution of states and that
the light string states constitute the fundamental entities in the weak coupling limit of strings.
In gravity, this feature dictated by the distance/duality conjecture is the restatement that
the light tower of states give rise to a complete effective dual description of the theory. The
fact that the energy is proportional to some power of m, the mass scale of the light tower, is
also consistent with the emergence proposal, which attempts to explain how large distances
in field space, small gauge couplings and related physical quantities arise from integrating out
the light tower [23–25].
     In the dS or quasi-dS case, it was further argued in [19] that α ≤ 12 to be consistent with
the Higuchi bound [26]. Indeed in some stringy examples there are stronger contributions to
V coming from tree level leading to V ∼ m2 . We now argue that d1 is the lower bound on α:

                                           1    1
                                             ≤α≤ .                                           (2.8)
                                           d    2
    Given that the tower of light states has a mass scale m, one would expect at the very least
a one-loop energy contribution from the light tower proportional to V ∼ md setting a scale for




                                              –5–
dark energy1 . Of course there should be other contributions to the potential in order to get
a quasi-dS, but because the one-loop term is generically present, the net dependence is still
expected to be no weaker than md . A higher power of m (i.e. a weaker total potential) would
necessitate a magical cancellation of the md term. Other motivations for the naturalness of
the bound 1/d on α have been given in [28, 29]. In this paper, we will thus be assuming the
bound in the range of α given in 2.8.
     In the context of the O(16)×O(16) string the contribution to the energy at weak coupling
is positive [20], because the main contribution comes from the light tower states and it turns
out there are more light fermions than bosons and fermions (bosons) contribute positively
(negatively) to the one-loop vacuum energy. As we will see in our universe we also expect
an effective potential which falls off at infinity from the positive direction, suggesting that
there are more light fermions than bosons in the mass scale of the light tower. In fact, this
observation was already made in [30], where it was conjectured that a quasi-dS scenario2
consistent with quantum gravity should contain a surplus of light fermions with masses m .
Λ1/d . This was required to avoid a violation of the non-supersymmetric AdS conjecture
[31] as well as the generalized distance conjecture [19] upon further compactification of the
theory to lower dimensions. In this sense, the value α = 1/d is special as it directly avoids
generating any Casimir vacua in lower dimensions that could be inconsistent with Swampland
considerations [30].

3   Swampland criteria and the prediction of the Dark Dimension

As we saw in the last section, Swampland criteria suggest that in extreme limits of parameter
space, light KK modes or string excitations emerge. We now want to apply this to our
universe. One of the extreme parameters in our universe is the cosmological constant which
in Planck units is
                                       Λ ∼ 10−122 .                                      (3.1)

We now argue that given other observational data in our universe, the smallness of this
parameter combined with Swampland principles lead to one extra mesoscopic dimension of
length scale of order of a micron.
     We start by noticing that a light tower of states causes significant deviations from New-
ton’s law at the energy scale m of the tower. For a KK tower, this is due to gravity propagating
on the extra dimension; for the string case, local physics breaks down at the string scale. Tor-
sion balance experiments provide the strongest bounds to deviations of the 1/r2 gravitational
force law. In [32], this law was verified down to the scales around 30 µm, implying that the
scale of the tower has to satisfy,
                                          m & 6.6 meV.                                      (3.2)
   1
     This observation has already been used in [27] to relate TCC to bound the exponent in the distance
conjecture.
   2
     This applies both to dS minima or quintessence models.




                                                –6–
     This scale is within an order of magnitude of the energy scale associated to the cosmo-
logical constant, Λ1/4 = 2.31 meV (in terms of length scales, Λ−1/4 ≈ 88 µm). Hence, the
mass scale of the tower must satisfy m & Λ1/4 , since otherwise we would have already de-
tected deviations of Newton’s law in our universe. The only way to make this experimental
bound consistent with the theoretical swampland bound (2.2) is that this is satisfied with the
boundary of the allowed range namely d1 = 41 :

                                                m ∼ Λ1/4                                             (3.3)

which coincides with the neutrino scale. We are therefore led to conclude that there is a tower
of states starting at the neutrino scale in our universe.
     As already mentioned, we expect that this tower is either a light string tower or a light
KK tower. In the first possibility, a perturbative string limit, local EFT breaks down at
the string scale m. Since we can describe physics above the neutrino scale with effective field
theory, the first scenario is ruled out experimentally. Hence, we are left only with the scenario
of decompactification.
     Assuming this, we must now determine the number n of large dimensions, close to the
decompactification limit. Typically, the strongest bounds for the existence of new light weakly
coupled particles come from astrophysical data. If extra dimensions are present, a new decay
mode becomes available through emission of the Kaluza-Klein modes which could leave a
trace in neutron stars and supernova explosions. For instance, emission of KK modes can
potentially cool a proto-neutron star too fast to be compatible with observations if the tower
is too light. According to [33], the current strongest bounds come from the heating of old
neutron stars by the surrounding cloud of trapped KK gravitons [33, 34], yielding

       • For the case of a single extra dimension: m−1 ∼ l < 44 µm

       • For the case of two extra dimensions: m−1 ∼ l < 1.6 · 10−4 µm

For more than two dimensions, the bounds are even more stringent. This means that the cases
of two or more extra dimensions are ruled out in our setup, since they are not compatible
with (3.3). The only possibility is, therefore, that the tower signals decompactification of a
single extra dimension, which we call the Dark Dimension. Using (2.1), the model leads to a
higher-dimensional Planck scale M̂ ∼ 109 GeV , a scale at which new physics must come into
play.3
    To sum up, we have argued that

                                         Λ ∼ m4 ∼ 10−122 Mpl
                                                          4
                                                             .                                       (3.4)
                                  1
In other words, we expect Λ 4 = λ m for some a priori O(1) parameter λ, and where m is
related to an inverse length scale m = l−1 of one extra mesoscopic dimension. To find λ we
   3
    Interestingly, using some entropy bounds, the same UV cut-off was pointed out in [29] by assuming an IR
cut-off set by the cosmological constant.




                                                  –7–
need extra information. We will now estimate λ and argue that

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m1/2 ≤ λ4 . 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ⇒   Λ−2/9 . l ≤ Λ−1/4 .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (3.5)

     The lower bound is a consequence of our assumption that the asymptotic limit has already
set in: for Λ ∼ λ4 m4 , the λ4 term should not be as small as, say, m, for then the scaling would
be more appropriately described as m5 . λ4 ∼ m1/2 is the lowest it can go while the scaling
Λ ∼ m4 being approximately true. The upper bound is most easily argued for pictorially, as
in Figure 1. Since we observe a positive vacuum energy, the potential should approach 0 from
above, signalling extra light KK fermions, as noted before. Moreover the potential should
turn down from the m4 pure contribution as that is too steep to give quasi dS. It could then
continue as a quintessence model or generate a dS maxima or minima. In any case, from this,
it follows that the quasi-static dS always has λ4 < 1.

                      ⇤(l)
                      <latexit sha1_base64="WovMK07cHMoRWvDB42jROOGBl+I=">AAACAHicbVC7TsNAEFyHVwivACWNRYQUmshGSFBG0FBQBIk8RGJF5/M6PuV8tu7OSFGUhm+ghZoO0fInlPwJl+CCJEw1uzOr3R0/5Uxpx/myCiura+sbxc3S1vbO7l55/6ClkkxSbNKEJ7LjE4WcCWxqpjl2Uokk9jm2/eH1VG8/olQsEfd6lKIXk4FgIaNEm9ZD79ZYA1Llp/1yxak5M9jLxM1JBXI0+uXvXpDQLEahKSdKdV0n1d6YSM0ox0mplylMCR2SAXYNFSRG5Y1nF0/skzCRto7QntV/vWMSKzWKfeOJiY7UojZt/qd1Mx1eemMm0kyjoMZitDDjtk7s6eN2wCRSzUeGECqZudKmEZGEahPP3BZl3okwmJRMJu5iAsukdVZznZp7d16pX+XpFOEIjqEKLlxAHW6gAU2gIOAZXuDVerLerHfr49dasPKZQ5iD9fkDZCKWpg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V1-loop ⇠ m4 ⇠ l 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="GeJcPeWMGEveXDWm09eSr6wwNGo=">AAACHHicbVC7TgMxEPTxDOEVoKSxCEg0RHcoEpQRNJRBIg8pL/mcDbGwzyd7DxGd7gf4CL6BFmo6RItEyZ/ghBRAmGbHO7Py7oSxFBZ9/8Obm19YXFrOreRX19Y3Ngtb23WrE8OhxrXUphkyC1JEUEOBEpqxAaZCCY3w5nysN27BWKGjKxzF0FHsOhIDwRm6Vq+wX++lbYQ7TIMjqXWcZW0rFFXd8qTKbnpUznqFol/yJ6CzJJiSIpmi2it8tvuaJwoi5JJZ2wr8GDspMyi4hCzfTizEjN+wa2g5GjEFtpNOrsnowUAbikOgk/dPb8qUtSMVOo9iOLR/tXHzP62V4OC0k4ooThAi7ixOGySSoqbjUGhfGOAoR44wboTbkvIhM4yji+7XL9adM4R+lneZBH8TmCX141Lgl4LLcrFyNk0nR3bJHjkkATkhFXJBqqRGOLknj+SJPHsP3ov36r19W+e86cwO+QXv/QuVL6IL</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="JJsxVRbWCPiMsCCUEjSGG/+IuVc=">AAAB+HicbVC7TsNAEFyHVwivACXNiQiJKrIREnRE0FAGRB5SYkXnyzo+5fzQ3RkpWPkDWqjpEC1/Q8mfcA4uSMJUszuz2t3xEsGVtu0vq7Syura+Ud6sbG3v7O5V9w/aKk4lwxaLRSy7HlUoeIQtzbXAbiKRhp7Ajje+yfXOI0rF4+hBTxJ0QzqKuM8Z1aZ1f1UZVGt23Z6BLBOnIDUo0BxUv/vDmKUhRpoJqlTPsRPtZlRqzgROK/1UYULZmI6wZ2hEQ1RuNrt0Sk78WBIdIJnVf70ZDZWahJ7xhFQHalHLm/9pvVT7l27GoyTVGDFjMZqfCqJjkj9Mhlwi02JiCGWSmysJC6ikTJtY5rYo806Aw2meibOYwDJpn9Udu+7cndca10U6ZTiCYzgFBy6gAbfQhBYw8OEZXuDVerLerHfr49dasoqZQ5iD9fkDWDqTRQ==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l=m 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="zYBCnh+KKk+oLtE8GDPQs37osro=">AAAB/nicbVA9SwNBEJ3zM8avqKXNYhBsDHciaCMEbSwjmA9IzrC3mcst2ftgd08Ix4G/wVZrO7H1r1j6T9zEK0ziq97Me8PMPC8RXGnb/rKWlldW19ZLG+XNre2d3crefkvFqWTYZLGIZcejCgWPsKm5FthJJNLQE9j2RjcTvf2IUvE4utfjBN2QDiPuc0a1aXXEVfiQnTp5v1K1a/YUZJE4BalCgUa/8t0bxCwNMdJMUKW6jp1oN6NScyYwL/dShQllIzrErqERDVG52fTenBz7sSQ6QDKt/3ozGio1Dj3jCakO1Lw2af6ndVPtX7oZj5JUY8SMxWh+KoiOyeRtMuASmRZjQyiT3FxJWEAlZdqEM7NFmXcCHORlk4kzn8AiaZ3VHLvm3J1X69dFOiU4hCM4AQcuoA630IAmMBDwDC/waj1Zb9a79fFrXbKKmQOYgfX5AzEslgI=</latexit>




Figure 1. Schematic representation of the vacuum energy of the Dark Dimension as a function of its
size. We expect that for large values of the radii, the one-loop effect which goes like m4 dominates
the potential leading to excess light fermions. At smaller radii, other effects may take over, resulting
in either a (quasi-)dS minimum (dotted lines), or just a maximum. Barring fine-tuning, the location
of the maximum is always strictly below the extrapolation of the one-loop vacuum energy curve (as
indicated by the arrow), hence yielding λ4 < 1.


     Another motivation to have λ < 1 comes from the Casimir energy. Recall that the
theoretical bound α ≥ 1/d in (2.8) comes from the fact that at the very least, in the absence
of supersymmetry, there will be a one-loop Casimir energy contribution to the vacuum energy
from the light tower of order V ∼ λCasimir m4 . This proportionality factor can be explicitly
computed for a circle compactification from D=5 to 4 dimensions, yielding

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Γ(D/2)ζ(D)       3ζ(5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       λCasimir =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     =       = 5 · 10−5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (3.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (2π)D−1 Γ(1)ΠD/2   (2π)6

Hence, if the correlation Λ1/4 = λm comes from the Casimir contribution, it is natural to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     –8–
                          1/4
expect a parameter λ ≤ λCasimir ∼ 10−1 . More concretely, for D = 5, this value of λ leads to

                                         l ≈ 7.42 µm.                                       (3.7)

     Note that the correlation between the vacuum energy at a dS maximum and the scale of
the tower can be explained for example from a two-term structure of the potential, which can
arise in examples of dimensional reduction [28, 30]. As explored in [35, 36], a tachyonic de
Sitter scenario is compatible with observational data, and seems potentially easier to embed
consistently in quantum gravity (the top of the hill scenario was explored as it is compatible
with the dS conjecture [37–39]). Our analysis is consistent with this scenario but does not
require it, as long as we end up with a quasi-dS vacuum.
     Thus from (3.5), we estimate 10−4 < λ < 1 or the central region λ ∼ 10−1 − 10−3 , which
leads us to one extra mesoscopic dimension of length scale in the micron range:

                                     l ∼ 0.1 µm − 10 µm.                                    (3.8)

The Casimir estimate (3.7) is in the middle of this range. Note also that this estimate
                                                                        1   2       1   1    2
leads to a slightly higher-dimensional Planck scale given by M̂ ∼ m 3 Mpl3 ∼ λ− 3 Λ 12 Mpl3 ∼
109 − 1010 GeV .

4   Realization in F-theory

Swampland ideas leads to the Dark Dimension scenario, but they do not directly tell us how
the matter sector is realized. However, if the matter is realized in the bulk of the extra
dimension, it leads to too small a coupling. Therefore it is clear that the matter sector should
arise in localized regions of the internal space. A potentially promising realization of this
scenario is in the context of F-theory model building and we follow the approach suggested
in [40, 41] (see also [42]). Indeed other phenomenological motivations and in particular
realization of GUT’s already led to the study of this class of models. In this framework,
grand unification occurs on a GUT 7-brane which is a contractible cycle in the base of a
Calabi-Yau 4-fold. The volume of the 7-brane in the higher dimensional Planck units is fixed
by the coupling constant of the standard matter fields,

                                     1
                                        = VSM M̂ 4 ∼ 102 ,                                  (4.1)
                                     e2

leading to a size for the GUT brane where the Standard Model fields reside lstd ∼ O(1)M̂ −1
(see Figure 2). In particular this leads to tower of matter charged under standard model
excitations, coming from the tower of states of the 7-brane, at a scale ∼ 1/lStd ∼ M̂ ∼
109 − 1010 GeV . It is natural to expect this scale to coincide with the SUSY breaking scale
(at least it may be an upper bound for it). In such a case the Higgs potential, which is
otherwise expected to exhibit instability around 1011 GeV [43], will be expected to have its




                                             –9–
stability restored at higher energies due to corrections from the tower of SM fields as well as
the restoration of supersymmetry, as explored e.g. in [44]. Of course, at this mass scale we
also encounter the higher dimensional black holes. All this suggests that we do not need to
worry about instability of the Higgs vacuum since the running is surely going to change the
potential before the instability arises.
     One may naturally ask how this story fits with the GUT scale in the 1015 − 1016 GeV
range expected from low energy considerations, which is above the five-dimensional Planck
scale. From an EFT point of view, it is natural to expect that strong threshold corrections
(see e.g. [5, 45, 46]) will dramatically modify the running of the couplings. This however
does not mean that the GUT scale needs to be brought down to M̂ , as the GUT scale is
determined by hypercharge flux in F-theory models which can be large4 . This leads to GUT
scales which can be higher by a few orders of magnitude. It is important to explore various
options of GUT realization and the related issue of proton stability further in this scenario5 .




                   lGUT
                   <latexit sha1_base64="HTMh71FjQ2Y2bBAvhNwcdf69KuE=">AAACBHicbVC7TsNAEDyHVwivACWNRYREFdkICcoICiiDFCeREhOdL+v4lPNDd2tEZLnlG2ihpkO0/Aclf8IluCAJU83uzGp3x0sEV2hZX0ZpZXVtfaO8Wdna3tndq+4ftFWcSgYOi0Usux5VIHgEDnIU0E0k0NAT0PHG11O98wBS8Thq4SQBN6SjiPucUdStezHI+giPmN04rTwfVGtW3ZrBXCZ2QWqkQHNQ/e4PY5aGECETVKmebSXoZlQiZwLySj9VkFA2piPoaRrREJSbza7OzRM/liYGYM7qv96MhkpNQk97QoqBWtSmzf+0Xor+pZvxKEkRIqYtWvNTYWJsTp83h1wCQzHRhDLJ9ZUmC6ikDHVEc1uUfieAYV7RmdiLCSyT9lndtur23XmtcVWkUyZH5JicEptckAa5JU3iEEYkeSYv5NV4Mt6Md+Pj11oyiplDMgfj8wfnfplA</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="OOI4lBd0PIyMpA0mTY97IXVvv7k=">AAAB93icbVC7TsNAEFyHVwgvAyXNiQiJKrIREpQRNJSJRB5SYkXnyzo+5fzQ3RnJsvIFtFDTIVo+h5I/4RJckISpZndmtbvjp4Ir7ThfVmVjc2t7p7pb29s/ODyyj0+6Kskkww5LRCL7PlUoeIwdzbXAfiqRRr7Anj+9n+u9J5SKJ/GjzlP0IjqJecAZ1abVFiO77jScBcg6cUtShxKtkf09HCcsizDWTFClBq6Taq+gUnMmcFYbZgpTyqZ0ggNDYxqh8orFoTNyESSS6BDJov7rLWikVB75xhNRHapVbd78TxtkOrj1Ch6nmcaYGYvRgkwQnZD5v2TMJTItckMok9xcSVhIJWXapLK0RZl3QhzPaiYTdzWBddK9arhOw21f15t3ZTpVOINzuAQXbqAJD9CCDjBAeIYXeLVy6816tz5+rRWrnDmFJVifP2ohk14=</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit




Figure 2. Schematic representation of the Dark Dimension in an F-theory GUT scenario. Higher towers
of SM fields localized in the GUT brane kick in at M̂ , significantly changing the Higgs potential and
preventing the onset of the instability noticed in [43].


     Also the issue of realizing a quasi-dS background in this setup is important. In this
connection one is naturally led to large volume scenarios in the context of F-theory which
has been studied in [48]. Unfortunately the technical issues related to obtaining dS or even
quasi-dS solutions in this context are still not settled (see e.g.[49, 50]).
     We also need to consider the couplings between the scalar parametrizing the size of the
Dark Dimension (radion) and the matter sector, to avoid trouble with fifth-force constraints
[32]. One way to do this is to make the radion sufficiently heavy; another is to suppress the
couplings of the radion to the matter sector which will be localised on the GUT branes, and
could depend e.g. on the geometry of additional compact dimensions. This is an interesting
question that should be explored further in the future.
   4
    Note that the flux cannot be much larger than 104 − 105 (bounded by tadpole conditions) [47].
   5
    For example, in [46] it is argued that the hypercharge flux deforms the SM fermion wave functions leading
to a suppression, avoiding in this way the strong experimental proton decay constraints.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    – 10 –
5    Further phenomenological predictions of the dark dimension scenario

The basic observation of this paper is that, if we entertain the possibility that our universe is
close to an infinite distance limit, experimental considerations only allow this to be a meso-
scopic extra dimension, which is tied together with the vacuum energy. As a result, several
phenomena typically associated to the large extra dimensions scenario [6, 7, 51] appear for
us. The main difference is that the predicted scales are completely different, reflecting the
different motivations between the two scenarios. Perhaps the most direct way to check our
scenario is to sharpen the impressive experiments [32] testing deviations from the Newton’s
gravitational force law to an even higher precision. Indeed the current precision is at the
doorstep of our prediction and a factor of 10 − 100 improvement in the precision of this
experiment would bring us to a regime to seriously test our scenario. There are other phe-
nomenological implication of our scenario and in this last section we review a few of these
implications focusing on the new connections that follow from our Swampland principles.

Neutrino masses and H0 tension
In a large extra dimension, the towers that become light are KK modes. Since V ∼ m4KK ,
and experimentally V ∼ m4ν is close to the neutrino mass scale, it is natural to identify the
tower with a tower of sterile, right-handed neutrinos, as done in [7, 51]6 . Note that this is
particularly natural in our setup, because as we have already discussed the sign of the vacuum
energy suggests that we have an excess of light fermions some of which could be viewed as
giving rise to this tower. Moreover, as described in section 4, we do not expect to find a tower
with the quantum numbers of the SM until the species scale M̂ . Therefore we expect light
left-handed neutrinos on the GUT brane that couple to a KK tower of right-handed ones in
the bulk. Precisely this scenario is explored exhaustively in [55], from the bottom-up point
of view and due to its phenomenological appeal. As explained there, schematically there is
an effective 2 × 2 mass matrix for each flavor [7, 51, 55] of the form
                                                               yhHi
                                                                      
                                                       0       √
                                          M =  yhHi            lM̂  ,                                    (5.1)
                                                √               1
                                                                l
                                                        lM̂

with l being the size of the extra dimension, as before, and y being the Yukawa coupling of
                                             √
the GUT brane with the bulk states. The 1/ l comes from the wave function normalization
of the bulk 5d fermions. Assuming 1/l is bigger than or equal to the off diagonal term we
can estimate the lower eigenvalue corresponding to the active neutrino to be

                                                        y 2 hHi2
                                               mν ≈                ,                                       (5.2)
                                                           M̂
   6
     This identification is also useful to avoid the generation of Casimir vacua that would violate the Swampland
conjectures upon compactifying the Standard Model in a circle [52–54].




                                                      – 11 –
modulo O(1) factors that are controlled by the effective number of states in the tower, and
can be tuned by turning on a bulk mass for the neutrino, if necessary. This is an expression
similar to the usual see-saw mechanism, with M̂ ≈ 109 − 1010 GeV playing the role usually
taken by MGUT . A Yukawa coupling of order y ∼ 10−2 − 10−3 is enough to bridge this gap
and produce the correct values for the neutrino masses.
    Clearly, there are many more detailed questions one needs to ask in this scenario. For
instance, the additional neutrino oscillations caused by the tower of sterile neutrinos must
be made compatible with experimental constraints. The work [55] shows that this is at least
possible. Another concern is the production of the tower of neutrinos at LHC, for instance
via Higgs decays. Taking again results from [55], the decay rate of Higgs to towers of KK
modes can be estimated as

                                                   Mh2 y 2
                                Γ(h → Tower) ≈               ∼ mν ,                          (5.3)
                                                      M̂
which is small and easily avoids all the experimental bounds. Notice how, throughout all of
this discussion, there is a single mass scale, the mass scale of the tower (or equivalently the
dark energy), which controls all the relevant aspects of the physics.
     Additional neutrino species may also be in trouble with cosmology, since these can provide
additional contributions to Neff , the number of relativistic degrees of freedom, which is very
constrained after electron-positron annihilation [55, 56] to be close to 3. In order to avoid
these constraints, the mixing between sterile and active neutrinos must be small enough so
that they are not significantly populated, providing a further constraint on the model. As
will be discussed in [57] the initial temperature can be in the TeV range, without the KK
excitations causing an issue for the Neff , thus avoiding any modification of the BBN (see also
[51]).
     An extra-dimensional model can also potentially provide an explanation of the H0 tension
[58], along the lines of [59, 60]. In this reference, it is pointed out that the H0 tension can be
significantly alleviated if there is a component of dark energy that becomes active around the
time of matter-radiation equality (known as “Early Dark Energy”), and furthermore that a
natural scenario is to introduce a new scalar that couples to the neutrino mass term. This
coupling would induce a kick to the energy density of the universe when the temperature of
the thermal background is around the neutrino mass scale. However it is difficult to justify,
from a theoretical point of view, why it has a coupling to neutrino mass terms. Both questions
are naturally accommodated in our scenario if we interpret the scalar to be the “radion” field
of the extra dimension; the coupling to neutrinos arises simply from the fact that the tower
of KK modes is coupled to the 5d metric and thus controls the neutrino masses by the seesaw
mechanism reviewed here.
     It is imperative to perform a quantitative analysis of the possible behaviors that a neutrino
tower can have according to the Distance Conjecture, and obtaining universal predictions for
neutrino masses and oscillations. Similarly, the scenario we just outlined for the H0 tension
needs to be taken beyond the qualitative level. We will pursue these directions and more




                                             – 12 –
generally the cosmological aspects of this scenario in a future publication [57].

Unification of hierarchies
The identification of the asymptotic tower with sterile right-handed neutrinos also allows
to provide a correlation between the EW hierarchy problem and the cosmological constant
problem, as we now explain. The mass matrix (5.1) yields two different scales for the mass
eigenstates,
                2        2
    • mν ∼ y hHi for the lightest (mostly active) neutrinos
                    M̂

    • Mν ∼ 1l for the heavier sterile neutrinos

In principle the eigenvalues of the neutrino mass matrix can have vastly different scales.
Assuming no unnatural mass hierarchies in the neutrino sector, leads to relating the weak
scale hierarchy to the dark energy. Namely for the active and sterile neutrinos to have similar
mass scales7 means that the mechanism for stabilization of this dark dimension also sets the
scale for the Higgs potential. We will not offer specific mechanisms for this in the present
paper, but hope to return to it in a future work. With this assumption, we are led to the
following prediction for the Higgs vev,
                                          s
                                                         1/3
                   2
                  y hHi 2   1           1 M̂      Λ1/6 Mpl
                          ∼ ⇒ hHi ∼            ∼             ∼ 10 − 103 GeV               (5.4)
                     M̂      l          y   l       y λ2/3
                                               2/3
where we have used that M̂ ∼ l−1/3 Mpl and l = λ Λ−1/4 with λ ∼ 10−1 − 10−3 , y ∼ 10−2 −
10−3 . Interestingly, this is not far from the experimental result for the Higgs vev8 . Note that
in our scenario we have tied all the questions of hierarchy to the dark energy. Namely we have
                                                   1/3
conntected the Higgs vev hHi ∼ y −1 λ−2/3 Λ1/6 Mpl , the mesoscopic length scale and neutrino
                                                                                                          2/3
masses l ∼ λΛ−1/4 ∼ 1/mν , as well as a new UV scale in physics M̂ ∼ λ−1/3 Λ1/12 Mpl all
to the dark energy9 . Typically, such small values for the Higgs vev seem unnatural from a
bottom-up perspective. However, when identifying the tower of states with sterile neutrinos,
the smalleness of the Higgs vev can emerge from the smallness of the cosmological constant,
so that the two hierarchy problems are reduced to a single one. Of course, one still needs to
explain why the cosmological constant is small, which we relate to the fact that we live near
an asymptotic boundary of the field space, i.e. a large field distance limit.
   7
     Neutrino oscillations can be sensitive to the exact mass splitting between active and sterile neutrinos [55],
a topic we hope to return to in the future [57].
   8
                                          masses are upper bounded by 3i=1 mνi ≤ 0.139(0.174) eV for NH(IH)
                                                                        P
     Experimentally, the active neutrino
                                 P3
neutrinos according to [61] (or i=1 mνi ≤ 0.09 eV according to the most recent analysis [62]). This implies
that i mνi < Λ1/4 ∼ Mν , so that the the above result (5.4) which was obtained by setting the masses of
      P
active and sterile neutrinos equal is a slight over-estimation of the Higgs vev.
   9
     For another way the logic of naturalness in EFTs must be modified in the presence of gravity see [63].




                                                     – 13 –
Ultra-high energy cosmic rays and the GZK limit
Astrophysical sources can accelerate particles to energies much beyond those that can be
probed by LHC, generating ultra-high energy cosmic rays that reach the Earth and produce
showers that can be detected [64]. Current predictions for cosmic ray abundance typically
assume that ultra-high energy cosmic rays are mostly comprised by heavy nuclei and other
charged particles accelerated to enormously high energies by magnetic fields [64, 65]. With
this assumption, the spectrum of ultra-high energy cosmic rays can be reasonably explained,
including somewhat detailed features, up to energies of around 109 − 1010 GeV, where the
abundance of cosmic rays suddenly drops exponentially. One simple way to explain this
suppression is that at these energy scales, scattering between the high-energy cosmic rays
and CMB photons becomes efficient, effectively turning the intergalactic medium into an
opaque material for the ultra-high energy cosmic rays. This upper bound in energy is known
as the GZK limit [66, 67], and the theoretical value roughly coincides with the observed
supression in the cosmic ray spectrum. It is however still an open question whether the sharp
cutoff observed in the data at very high energies is indeed the GZK mechanism or has to do
with intrinsic limitations of the sources of cosmic rays [65].
     The GZK energy scale of roughly 109 − 1010 GeV coincides with the species scale/ 5d
Planck mass scale in our scenario. As a result, we would expect a qualitative change in the
behavior of cosmic rays starting at around this energy scale. Particles with masses above
this scale necessarily have internal structure in the fifth dimension, and scattering of these
would lead to a significant production of KK modes. Localized objects in the fifth dimension
necessarily become black holes at this energy scale. While it is difficult to be precise, our
scenario would predict significant deviations in the spectrum of ultra-high energy cosmic rays
beyond the GZK limit.
     It is frustrating that the GZK scale coincides with M̂ , as that prevents us from checking
our scenario directly. On the bright side, the GZK limit does not imply that there cannot be
sources of cosmic rays with energy beyond 109 GeV; it only says cosmic rays of higher energies
which are produced sufficiently far away enough (beyond the so-called GZK sphere, of radius
50 M pc) will not reach us. Higher sensitivity to ultra-high energy cosmic rays in our vicinity
may make some of the effects we discuss observable. Discrimination of ultra-high energy
cosmic ray sources within and outside the GZK sphere is one of the current experimental
priorities [65].

Acknowledgments

We have greatly benefited from discussions with Prateek Agrawal, Nima Arkani-Hamed, Greg
Gabadadze, Eduardo Gonzalo, Jonathan Heckman, Luis Ibáñez, Georges Obied, Eran Palti,
Matthew Reece, Tom Rudelius, Iván Martı́nez Soler and Mark Trodden. The work of MM
and CV is supported by a grant from the Simons Foundation (602883, CV) and by the NSF
grant PHY-2013858. The work of IV is partly supported by the grants RYC2019-028512-I




                                            – 14 –
from the MCI (Spain), PGC2018-095976-B-C21 from MCIU/AEI/FEDER, UE and the grant
IFT Centro de Excelencia Severo Ochoa SEV-2016-0597.

References

 [1] C. Vafa, The String Landscape and the Swampland, hep-th/0509212.
 [2] T. D. Brennan, F. Carta and C. Vafa, The String Landscape, the Swampland, and the Missing
     Corner, PoS TASI2017 (2017) 015, [1711.00864].
 [3] E. Palti, The Swampland: Introduction and Review, Fortsch. Phys. 67 (2019) 1900037,
     [1903.06239].
 [4] M. van Beest, J. Calderón-Infante, D. Mirfendereski and I. Valenzuela, Lectures on the
     Swampland Program in String Compactifications, 2102.01111.
 [5] I. Antoniadis, A Possible new dimension at a few TeV, Phys. Lett. B 246 (1990) 377–384.
 [6] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. R. Dvali, The Hierarchy problem and new dimensions
     at a millimeter, Phys. Lett. B 429 (1998) 263–272, [hep-ph/9803315].
 [7] K. R. Dienes, E. Dudas and T. Gherghetta, Neutrino oscillations without neutrino masses or
     heavy mass scales: A Higher dimensional seesaw mechanism, Nucl. Phys. B 557 (1999) 25,
     [hep-ph/9811428].
 [8] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, A Large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension, Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 83 (1999) 3370–3373, [hep-ph/9905221].
 [9] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, An Alternative to compactification, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999)
     4690–4693, [hep-th/9906064].
[10] Fermi-LAT collaboration, M. Ajello et al., Limits on Large Extra Dimensions Based on
     Observations of Neutron Stars with the Fermi-LAT, JCAP 02 (2012) 012, [1201.2460].
[11] Y. Aghababaie, C. P. Burgess, S. L. Parameswaran and F. Quevedo, Towards a naturally small
     cosmological constant from branes in 6-D supergravity, Nucl. Phys. B 680 (2004) 389–414,
     [hep-th/0304256].
[12] R. Sundrum, Fat gravitons, the cosmological constant and submillimeter tests, Phys. Rev. D 69
     (2004) 044014, [hep-th/0306106].
[13] A. Dupays, B. Lamine and A. Blanchard, Can Dark Energy emerge from quantum effects in
     compact extra dimension ?, Astron. Astrophys. 554 (2013) A60, [1301.1763].
[14] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, On the Geometry of the String Landscape and the Swampland, Nucl.
     Phys. B766 (2007) 21–33, [hep-th/0605264].
[15] G. Dvali, Black Holes and Large N Species Solution to the Hierarchy Problem, Fortsch. Phys.
     58 (2010) 528–536, [0706.2050].
[16] G. Dvali and M. Redi, Black Hole Bound on the Number of Species and Quantum Gravity at
     LHC, Phys. Rev. D 77 (2008) 045027, [0710.4344].
[17] S.-J. Lee, W. Lerche and T. Weigand, Emergent Strings from Infinite Distance Limits,
     1910.01135.




                                               – 15 –
[18] S.-J. Lee, W. Lerche and T. Weigand, Emergent Strings, Duality and Weak Coupling Limits for
     Two-Form Fields, 1904.06344.
[19] D. Lüst, E. Palti and C. Vafa, AdS and the Swampland, Phys. Lett. B 797 (2019) 134867,
     [1906.05225].
[20] L. Alvarez-Gaume, P. H. Ginsparg, G. W. Moore and C. Vafa, An O(16) x O(16) Heterotic
     String, Phys. Lett. B 171 (1986) 155–162.
[21] L. J. Dixon and J. A. Harvey, String Theories in Ten-Dimensions Without Space-Time
     Supersymmetry, Nucl. Phys. B 274 (1986) 93–105.
[22] J. Polchinski, String Theory: Volume 2, Superstring Theory and Beyond. Cambridge
     Monographs on Mathematical Physics. Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[23] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece and T. Rudelius, The Weak Gravity Conjecture and Emergence from
     an Ultraviolet Cutoff, Eur. Phys. J. C 78 (2018) 337, [1712.01868].
[24] T. W. Grimm, E. Palti and I. Valenzuela, Infinite Distances in Field Space and Massless
     Towers of States, JHEP 08 (2018) 143, [1802.08264].
[25] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece and T. Rudelius, Emergence of Weak Coupling at Large Distance in
     Quantum Gravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) 051601, [1802.08698].
[26] A. Higuchi, Forbidden Mass Range for Spin-2 Field Theory in De Sitter Space-time, Nucl.
     Phys. B 282 (1987) 397–436.
[27] A. Bedroya and C. Vafa, Trans-Planckian Censorship and the Swampland, JHEP 09 (2020)
     123, [1909.11063].
[28] T. Rudelius, Dimensional reduction and (Anti) de Sitter bounds, JHEP 08 (2021) 041,
     [2101.11617].
[29] A. Castellano, A. Herráez and L. E. Ibáñez, IR/UV mixing, towers of species and swampland
     conjectures, JHEP 08 (2022) 217, [2112.10796].
[30] E. Gonzalo, L. E. Ibáñez and I. Valenzuela, AdS swampland conjectures and light fermions,
     Phys. Lett. B 822 (2021) 136691, [2104.06415].
[31] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, Non-supersymmetric AdS and the Swampland, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.
     21 (2017) 1787–1801, [1610.01533].
[32] J. G. Lee, E. G. Adelberger, T. S. Cook, S. M. Fleischer and B. R. Heckel, New Test of the
     Gravitational 1/r2 Law at Separations down to 52 µm, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 (2020) 101101,
     [2002.11761].
[33] Particle Data Group collaboration, P. A. Zyla et al., Review of Particle Physics, PTEP
     2020 (2020) 083C01.
[34] S. Hannestad and G. G. Raffelt, Supernova and neutron star limits on large extra dimensions
     reexamined, Phys. Rev. D 67 (2003) 125008, [hep-ph/0304029].
[35] P. Agrawal and G. Obied, Dark Energy and the Refined de Sitter Conjecture, JHEP 06 (2019)
     103, [1811.00554].
[36] Y. Olguin-Trejo, S. L. Parameswaran, G. Tasinato and I. Zavala, Runaway Quintessence, Out
     of the Swampland, JCAP 01 (2019) 031, [1810.08634].




                                              – 16 –
[37] G. Obied, H. Ooguri, L. Spodyneiko and C. Vafa, De Sitter Space and the Swampland,
     1806.08362.
[38] S. K. Garg and C. Krishnan, Bounds on Slow Roll and the de Sitter Swampland, 1807.05193.
[39] H. Ooguri, E. Palti, G. Shiu and C. Vafa, Distance and de Sitter Conjectures on the
     Swampland, 1810.05506.
[40] C. Beasley, J. J. Heckman and C. Vafa, GUTs and Exceptional Branes in F-theory - I, JHEP
     01 (2009) 058, [0802.3391].
[41] C. Beasley, J. J. Heckman and C. Vafa, GUTs and Exceptional Branes in F-theory - II:
     Experimental Predictions, JHEP 01 (2009) 059, [0806.0102].
[42] R. Donagi and M. Wijnholt, Model Building with F-Theory, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 15 (2011)
     1237–1317, [0802.2969].
[43] J. Elias-Miro, J. R. Espinosa, G. F. Giudice, G. Isidori, A. Riotto and A. Strumia, Higgs mass
     implications on the stability of the electroweak vacuum, Phys. Lett. B 709 (2012) 222–228,
     [1112.3022].
[44] L. E. Ibanez and I. Valenzuela, The Higgs Mass as a Signature of Heavy SUSY, JHEP 05
     (2013) 064, [1301.5167].
[45] J. P. Conlon and E. Palti, On Gauge Threshold Corrections for Local IIB/F-theory GUTs,
     Phys. Rev. D 80 (2009) 106004, [0907.1362].
[46] L. E. Ibanez, F. Marchesano, D. Regalado and I. Valenzuela, The Intermediate Scale MSSM,
     the Higgs Mass and F-theory Unification, JHEP 07 (2012) 195, [1206.2655].
[47] K. Becker and M. Becker, M theory on eight manifolds, Nucl. Phys. B477 (1996) 155–167,
     [hep-th/9605053].
[48] V. Balasubramanian, P. Berglund, J. P. Conlon and F. Quevedo, Systematics of moduli
     stabilisation in Calabi-Yau flux compactifications, JHEP 03 (2005) 007, [hep-th/0502058].
[49] D. Junghans, Topological Constraints in the LARGE-Volume Scenario, 2205.02856.
[50] D. Junghans, LVS de Sitter Vacua are probably in the Swampland, 2201.03572.
[51] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, G. R. Dvali and J. March-Russell, Neutrino masses from
     large extra dimensions, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2001) 024032, [hep-ph/9811448].
[52] H. Ooguri and L. Spodyneiko, New Kaluza-Klein instantons and the decay of AdS vacua, Phys.
     Rev. D96 (2017) 026016, [1703.03105].
[53] E. Gonzalo and L. E. Ibáñez, The Fundamental Need for a SM Higgs and the Weak Gravity
     Conjecture, 1806.09647.
[54] E. Gonzalo, L. E. Ibáñez and I. Valenzuela, Swampland constraints on neutrino masses, JHEP
     02 (2022) 088, [2109.10961].
[55] M. Carena, Y.-Y. Li, C. S. Machado, P. A. N. Machado and C. E. M. Wagner, Neutrinos in
     Large Extra Dimensions and Short-Baseline νe Appearance, Phys. Rev. D 96 (2017) 095014,
     [1708.09548].




                                              – 17 –
[56] S. Hagstotz, P. F. de Salas, S. Gariazzo, M. Gerbino, M. Lattanzi, S. Vagnozzi et al., Bounds on
     light sterile neutrino mass and mixing from cosmology and laboratory searches, Phys. Rev. D
     104 (2021) 123524, [2003.02289].
[57] E. Gonzalo, M. Montero, G. Obied and C. Vafa, Dark dimension gravitons as dark matter, to
     appear, 2022.
[58] E. Di Valentino, O. Mena, S. Pan, L. Visinelli, W. Yang, A. Melchiorri et al., In the realm of
     the Hubble tension—a review of solutions, Class. Quant. Grav. 38 (2021) 153001, [2103.01183].
[59] J. Sakstein and M. Trodden, Early Dark Energy from Massive Neutrinos as a Natural
     Resolution of the Hubble Tension, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 (2020) 161301, [1911.11760].
[60] M. Carrillo González, Q. Liang, J. Sakstein and M. Trodden, Neutrino-Assisted Early Dark
     Energy: Theory and Cosmology, JCAP 04 (2021) 063, [2011.09895].
[61] GAMBIT Cosmology Workgroup collaboration, P. Stöcker et al., Strengthening the bound
     on the mass of the lightest neutrino with terrestrial and cosmological experiments, Phys. Rev. D
     103 (2021) 123508, [2009.03287].
[62] E. Di Valentino, S. Gariazzo and O. Mena, Most constraining cosmological neutrino mass
     bounds, Phys. Rev. D 104 (2021) 083504, [2106.15267].
[63] L. E. Ibáñez, V. Martin-Lozano and I. Valenzuela, Constraining Neutrino Masses, the
     Cosmological Constant and BSM Physics from the Weak Gravity Conjecture, JHEP 11 (2017)
     066, [1706.05392].
[64] L. A. Anchordoqui, Ultra-High-Energy Cosmic Rays, Phys. Rept. 801 (2019) 1–93,
     [1807.09645].
[65] R. Alves Batista et al., Open Questions in Cosmic-Ray Research at Ultrahigh Energies, Front.
     Astron. Space Sci. 6 (2019) 23, [1903.06714].
[66] K. Greisen, End to the cosmic ray spectrum?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 (1966) 748–750.
[67] G. T. Zatsepin and V. A. Kuzmin, Upper limit of the spectrum of cosmic rays, JETP Lett. 4
     (1966) 78–80.




                                               – 18 –
