                                                                                                  CALT-68-2600, HUTP-06/A017




                                             On the Geometry of the String Landscape
arXiv:hep-th/0605264v1 26 May 2006




                                                                  and the Swampland


                                                                   Hirosi Ooguri1 and Cumrun Vafa2


                                                                  1
                                                                      California Institute of Technology
                                                                        Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

                                                        2
                                                            Jefferson Physical Laboratory, Harvard University
                                                                       Cambridge, MA 02138, USA



                                                                                 Abstract
                                         We make a number of conjectures about the geometry of continuous moduli param-
                                     eterizing the string landscape. In particular we conjecture that such moduli are always
                                     given by expectation value of scalar fields and that moduli spaces with finite non-zero
                                     diameter belong to the swampland. We also conjecture that points at infinity in a moduli
                                     space correspond to points where an infinite tower of massless states appear, and that
                                     near these regions the moduli space is negatively curved. We also propose that there is no
                                     non-trivial 1-cycle of minimum length in the moduli space. This leads in particular to the
                                     prediction of the existence of a radially massive partner to the axion. These conjectures
                                     put strong constraints on inflaton potentials that can appear in a consistent quantum the-
                                     ory of gravity. Our conjectures are supported by a number of highly non-trivial examples
                                     from string theory. Moreover it is shown that these conditions can be violated if gravity
                                     is decoupled.

                                     May 2006
1. Introduction

    The fact that string theory seems to offer a diverse range of possibilities for vacua has
been viewed as a drawback for the theory: We cannot converge on a precise prediction
for the theory. However despite this diversity of options for the string landscape, it has
been pointed out in [1] that there are also a number of patterns that seem to emerge. Not
every effective field theory that appears consistent seems to arise in string theory. It is
natural to conjecture that these theories are not fully consistent as quantum gravitational
theories. Such theories belong to the swampland. The condition to be on the swampland
can be lifted if we decouple gravity. In other words a fully consistent quantum field
theory cannot always be coupled to gravity. It is natural to conjecture that points on
the swampland are “anomalous quantum gravitational theories,” which are anomalous in
a more subtle way, than has been discovered in the context of quantum field theories. It
would be important to improve the restrictions for theories to arise in string theory. By
tabulating such restrictions and finding the criteria that distinguish the swampland from
the landscape one can hope to have a deeper understanding into the universality class
of quantum gravitational theories. The main aim of this paper is to take some modest
steps in this direction. For some related conjectures distinguishing swampland from the
landscape see [2,3,4,5].
    One conjectural criterion to be on the string landscape is that the volume of the
moduli space seems typically finite. There are, however, well known counter-examples to
this seemingly general phenomenon. Consider compactification on a circle of radius r. The
moduli space for the circle has a metric
                                                         2
                                           2         dr
                                       ds =                    ,                          (1.1)
                                                      r

and the volume integral is divergent. In [1], it was pointed out that this volume divergence
correlates with the cutoff in mass. Namely, let ǫ be a fixed scale for the low energy effective
theory and that we insist that all the higher massive scales have mass greater than ǫ. For
large r and small ǫ, the region of the moduli of the moduli space satisfying this constraint
is specified by r < 1/ǫ. Clearly the volume of this region of the moduli space is finite,
                                     Z 1/ǫ
                                               dr
                                                  = − log ǫ.
                                               r
(The lower bound for the r integral should also be regularized in a similar fashion, as will
be clear in our examples.) We find the logarithmic volume divergence as we take the limit

                                                 1
ǫ → 0. Thus, in this case, the volume divergence is related to the emergence of infinitely
many extra light particles.
    Even though this divergence might seem special to 1-dimensional moduli spaces, here
we wish to formulate conjectures applicable to every moduli space M encountered in string
theory. Our conjectures apply both to the moduli space of scalars, as well as the subspaces
parameterizing minimum loci for the potentials defined on such spaces. In this way our
conjectures can be viewed as very powerful constraints on what potentials can appear in
a consistent theory of quantum gravity.
    Our conjectures suggest the following picture for the moduli space of a consistent
quantum gravitational theory: The moduli space is parameterized by expectation value of
scalar fields. We conjecture that there are points infinitely far away from one another on the
moduli space and that the points near infinity are points where a tower of massless modes
appear (with exponentially small mass as a function of the distance to such points). Infinite
distance singularities combined with finite volume typically imply negative curvatures.
Thus, we conjecture that the curvature becomes negative near points at infinity. We also
propose that there are no non-trivial loops of minimum length in the moduli space of
scalars. As we will elaborate later this is in line with the intuition that the duality groups
are generated by discrete gauge symmetries realized at different points on the moduli space.
    The organization of the paper is as follows: In section 2 we present the precise form
for our conjectures. In section 3 we present examples of how string theory supports our
conjectures and how if we decouple gravity we can violate them. In section 4 we discuss
some field theoretic considerations related to our conjectures. In section 5 we end with
some concluding thoughts.



2. The Conjectures

    In this section we present our conjectures. We claim that our conjectures apply to
consistent quantum theories of gravity with finite Planck mass in 4 and higher spacetime
dimensions. We do not consider 3 or lower dimensions as gravity does not contain prop-
agating degrees of freedom in these dimensions, though some of our conjectures may be
applicable to 3 dimensional cases as well. Our conjectures should apply to string theories
compactified to 4 and higher dimensions. But they should also apply to other consistent
quantum gravity theories in these dimensions if they exist.

                                              2
     Let M denote the moduli space of a consistent quantum gravity. Choosing a point
p ∈ M corresponds to fixing the low energy effective Lagrangian for the theory. Different
points in M are in different super-selection sectors. However, we could ask if we can
vary p locally in spacetime while keeping the asymptotic boundary conditions fixed at p.
Our conjecture states that this is possible. In addition, if we consider a finite volume
compactification down to 0 or 1 spatial dimensions (say on a torus), then we can vary the
point p and study M. Our first conjecture states that M is given by the expectation value
of scalar fields.

Conjecture 0: M is parameterized by inequivalent expectation values of massless scalar
fields.

This conjecture in the context of string theory is so well known that one does not even
bother to state it: There are no coupling constants in string theory; every parameter can
be varied by changing the expectation value of a field. This did not have to be the case
and one could a priori imagine a consistent quantum gravitational theory for which the
parameters are fixed (and in particular cannot be varied locally). We conjecture that such
gravitational theories cannot exist as a fully consistent quantum gravitational theory and
belong to the swampland.

     Given that points on M are given by the expectation value of scalar fields, we can use
their kinetic term to define a metric on M. We can then state our next conjecture dealing
with the geometry of M: Let us assume that the dimension of M is not zero. Let us
define d(p1 , p2 ) for two points p1 , p2 ∈ M as the distance of the shortest geodesic between
them measured in Planck units. We conjecture that the distance can take an arbitrary
large value, namely:

Conjecture 1: Choose any point p0 ∈ M. For any positive T , there is another point
p ∈ M such that d(p, p0 ) > T .

More strongly, we claim that the limit d(p, p0 ) → ∞ is correlated with a breakdown of the
low energy effective theory in a particular way:

Conjecture 2: Compared to the theory at p0 ∈ M, the theory at p with d(p, p0 ) > T has
an infinite tower of light particles starting with mass of the order of e−αT for some α > 0.
In the T → ∞ limit, the number of extra light particles of mass less than a fixed mass
scale becomes infinite.

                                              3
In the first part of the conjecture 2, we are claiming that the low energy effective theory
defined on a particular point on the moduli space makes sense only in a domain in a
finite diameter from the point. In section 4 we will give a physical motivation for this
part of the conjecture. If the breakdown of the low energy theory is associated with an
infinite number of extra light particles, one-loop graphs of such particles can give rise to the
distance divergence. If only a finite number of particles becomes light, they alone do not
generate the distance divergence for dimensions higher than 2. This motivates the second
part of the conjecture 2. Note that this conjecture in particular places strong constraints
for inflationary models: We cannot have a slow roll inflation where the distance in the
scalar moduli space is much bigger than Planck length and still use the same effective field
theory.

Conjecture 3: The scalar curvature near the points at infinity is non-positive. (It is
strictly negative if the dimension of the moduli space is greater than 1.)

The fact that the curvature is negative near infinity is correlated with the fact that there
are points infinitely far away, even though the volume is finite.
    One could consider a stronger conjecture claiming various sectional curvatures being
negative near infinity. The geodesics deviation equation shows that neighboring geodesics
tend to diverge when curvatures are negative. In particular, in a compact space, this leads
to mixing of geodesics. More precisely, it is known that the geodesics flow in a compact
space with negative sectional curvatures is ergodic [6]. Our conjectures here go in that
direction. However they are not quite the same condition, as for instance, there are points
on M arising in string theory where the sectional curvature is positive, as will be noted
in the next section. Our conjecture here only refers to the scalar curvature being negative
near infinity, which is weaker. Nevertheless, it could be true that the geodesic motion on
the moduli space is ergodic. This could be potentially true, independently of the above
conjecture, and would be worth investigating.

Conjecture 4: There is no non-trivial 1-cycle with minimum length within a given ho-
motopy class in M.

Suppose M is obtained from dividing a contractible Teichmüller T space by a group action
Γ, as is often the case in string theory:

                                            M = T /Γ.

                                                4
Then the duality group associated to M is Γ. Fixed points of Γ have a nice physical
significance: If g ∈ Γ fixes a point p ∈ T , then g is a gauge symmetry at p. It seems to
be the case that Γ’s that appear in string theory are generated by group elements which
have fixed points. In other words the entire Γ can be viewed as a gauge symmetry which is
broken as we move around in M, and we recover different parts of it at different points of
M. If Γ is indeed generated by elements with fixed points, then π1 (M) would be trivial,
                                                                                Q
as each loop which can be identified with an element h ∈ Γ can be written as h = gi and
each gi has fixed points and so the corresponding segment of the path can be contracted
to a point. So the entire path would be contractible, thus making M simply connected.
Clearly in this case there is no 1-cycle of minimum length.
    Another motivation for this conjecture is the following. Suppose we compactify the
theory further down to (1+1) dimensions and choose the space to be a circle. If there is
a non-trivial 1-cycle in M with minimum length, we can use it to define a state with a
non-zero global charge by going over the corresponding path on the circle. Since there
are no global charges in a gravitational theory (to be consistent with no-hair theorems for
black holes), this cannot happen. This suggests that at least the center of π1 is trivial.
    Conjecture 4 suggests there is a partner to the axion. The axion is massless before
we take into account instanton effects, and its has a compact moduli space of S 1 . If we
can separate the scale of the instanton effects from those at the Planck scale so that the
instanton effects are taken into account in the low energy effective theory, the conjecture 4
would require that there exists another direction where S 1 shrinks to a point, i.e. a radial
partner to the axion.




3. Evidences for the Conjectures

    In the following, we will present evidences for these conjectures. We will also present
examples in string theory that, if we decouple gravity by taking the internal volume to be
infinitely large, then these constraints disappears. So it is only a constraint in the context
of quantum theories of gravity.

                                              5
3.1. Gravity Examples

Example i) M-theory Compactified on S 1

    In the 10-dimensional theory, which is equivalent to type IIA string, we have a massless
scalar r whose vev gives the radius of the circle. Since the metric on this space is (dr/r)2 ,
the geodesic distance between r and r0 is given by

                                      T = | log(r/r0 )|.

Since r and r0 can take arbitrary positive values, the conjecture 1 is clearly satisfied.
    If we fix r0 and take T → ∞, we have either r → ∞ or 0. On the one hand, in the
limit of r → ∞, the M theory develops light Kaluza-Klein modes with mass 1/r in the
11-dimensional frame. In the Einstein frame in 10 dimensions, which involves rescaling the
metric by r 1/4 , we find the lowest mass scale ǫ(T ) is
                                                           
                                          −1/8 −1         9
                                ǫ(T ) ∼ r     r ∼ exp − T
                                                          8

On the other hand, for the compactification at r = r0 e−T , the radius r → 0 and the theory
again develop light states, namely type IIA strings, corresponding to membranes wrapping
S 1 . The tension of the string will scale as r, which means that their mass in 11-dimensional
frame scales as r 1/2 . Or in 10-dimensional Einstein frame as
                                                               
                                      −1/8 1/2    3/8        3
                            ǫ(T ) ∼ r     r    =r     ∼ exp − T
                                                             8

So we see that this result is consistent with the conjecture 2 since in both cases infinitely
many light modes appear as T → ∞. Note that as this example demonstrates the coefficient
of the exponent is not universal (9/8 and 3/8 in this case) even for a given dimension.

Example ii) Type IIB Strings in 10 Dimensions

    The dilaton-axion moduli space is SL(2, Z)\SL(2, R)/SO(2), parametrized by τ =
τ1 + iτ2 , where τ1 and τ2 are related to vev’s of the axion and the dilaton. The metric in
this space is
                                                dτ dτ̄
                                       ds2 =           .                                 (3.1)
                                               (Imτ )2
This is a good example to illustrate the point of our conjectures since the volume of this
moduli space is finite yet a geodesic length toward i∞ is logarithmically divergent. As

                                               6
we take τ → i∞ keeping τ0 finite, the geodesic length between τ and τ0 is approximately
given by
                                       T ∼ log(Im τ /Im τ0 ).
                                                1
Since light stringy excitations of mass ∼ e− 4 T appear at τ , this exemplifies the conjectures
1 and 2.
    The metric (3.1) has a constant negative curvature, consistently with the conjecture
3. The curvature integral as well as the volume integral is finite, thanks to the quotienting
by the S-duality symmetry SL(2, Z). It is known that the geodesic flow on compact spaces
with constant negative curvatures is ergodic [7]. In particular, if we consider a region
τ2 > 1/ǫ in the fundamental domain, generic geodesics will pass through it within finite
geodesic time.
    This moduli space is simply connected since SL(2, Z) is generated by S and ST
transformations (S : τ → −1/τ, T : τ → τ + 1), both of which have fixed points in the
fundamental domain, at τ = i and τ = exp(2πi/3) respectively.

Example iii) Type IIB Strings Compactified on S 1

    In this case the moduli space of compactification is characterized by the radius r of
S 1 , in addition to the τ space discussed above. This example is similar to the example i,
and we have
                                          T = | log(r/r0 )|

in string frame in 10 dimensions. We get light Kaluza-Klein modes for r → ∞ and light
winding modes for r → 0. In the 9-dimensional Einstein frame, this translates to the
existence of light mass scales for large T given by
                                                                  
                              −1/7                   8            6
                  ǫ(T ) ∼ r          exp(−T ) ∼ exp − T   or exp − T
                                                     7            7

Thus, both conjectures 1 and 2 are satisfied.

Example iv) Theories with 16 Supercharges

    The classical moduli space of K3 is

                   (classical)
                 MK3             = SO(3, 19; Z)\SO(3, 19)/(SO(2) × SO(19)).

                                                    7
This is the relevant moduli space for the 7 dimensional theory obtained by compactifying
M-theory on K3. The physical moduli space of type II string on K3 includes configurations
of the NS-NS 2-form, the dilaton, and the R-R forms. In type IIA theory, the resulting
moduli space, in addition to the coupling constant (as discussed in the example iii in the
above), is
                     IIA
                    KK3  = SO(4, 20; Z)\SO(4, 20)/(SO(4) × SO(20)).

In type IIB theory, the coupling constant multiplet and other fields combine to give

                   MIIB
                    K3 = SO(5, 21; Z)\SO(5, 21)/(SO(5) × SO(21)).


In each of these moduli spaces, any point which is infinite distance away from points in
the middle of the moduli space is dual to a decompactification limit. Therefore an infinite
tower of light Kaluza-Klein modes appears at each of these points, in accord with the
conjectures 1 and 2.
    These spaces have negative curvatures, satisfying the conjecture 3. In general, if Γ is
a lattice in a connected semi-simple Lie group G with finite center and K is a maximal
compact subgroup of G, generic geodesics are dense in the coset space Γ\G/K [8] leading
to ergodicity.
    For the K3 moduli space, the discrete group Γ is known to be generated by symmetry
of the worldsheet CFT’s [9,10], and this supports the expectation from the conjecture 4
that these moduli spaces are simply connected.
    The same is true for heterotic/type I string compactified on T d , whose moduli space
(in addition to the coupling constant) is

                 SO(d, 16 + d; Z)\SO(d, 16 + d; R)/(SO(d) × SO(16 + d)).



Example v) Compactifications of Type II Strings on Calabi-Yau threefolds

    The moduli space splits into the vector multiplet moduli space, which has special
Kähler structure, and the hypermultiplet moduli space, which is quaternionic Kähler. In
the type IIB theory, the vector multiplet moduli space is parametrized complex structure
of the Calabi-Yau manifold; in the type IIA theory, it is parametrized by complexified
Kähler structure. The Kähler moduli space has at least one infinite distance singularity
corresponding to the decompactification limit, where infinitely many Kaluza-Klein modes

                                            8
become light. By the mirror symmetry, we expect that the complex moduli space has an
infinite distance singularity. This demonstrates the conjecture 1.
      The curvature of the vector multiplet moduli space is not necessarily negative. How-
ever, one can see from explicit examples as that in [11] that the scalar curvature asymptotes
to negative toward infinite distance singularities. In fact, this is a general fact. By using
results in [12], one can estimate the behavior of the metric near singularities. Since the
moduli space is orientable, the Einstein action can be written as

                                     √
                                 Z           Z
                                       gR ∼ c1 ∧ k n−1 ,
                                    M

where c1 is the first Chern class, k is the Kähler form, and n is the complex dimension
of M. This can be expressed as an integral of the same quantity of a compactification
M of M, which is topological, plus contributions from singularities. One can show that
infinite distance singularities always give strictly negative contributions to the integral,1
as expected from the conjecture 2. For Calabi-Yau manifolds with one Kähler moduli,
the large size limit is always given by constant negative curvature (as the prepotential is
dominated by X13 /X0 in the standard notation).
      Are Calabi-Yau moduli spaces simply connected? One way to test this is to see
whether monodromies of period integrals are generated by transformations with fixed
points represented by Calabi-Yau manifolds with symmetries. One subtlety is that such
points can be at infinite distance away from the middle of the moduli space, in which case
one has to be careful about how to define π1 . Indeed there is an examples of where the
moduli space is complex one-dimensional with two different large complex structure limits
[13].2 If we remove the two points in the limits, the moduli space has the topology of
C∗ and is not simply connected. In this case, the length of a circle that goes around the
non-trivial π1 of C∗ vanishes as the circle approaches to either one of the large complex
structure limits. This follows from the fact that the limits are infinite distances away yet
the volume of the moduli space is finite. Therefore the conjecture 4 is still valid in this
case.
      As for the hypermulitplet moduli space, though a quaternionic Kähler manifold in
general can have curvatures of any sign [14], it is known that those realized for hypermul-
tiplet fields coupled to supergravity must have a negative scalar curvatures [15], satisfying

  1
      We would like to thank Z. Lu for helping us make this estimate.
  2
      We thank D. Morrison for bringing this example into our attention.

                                               9
the conjecture 2. Note that the negativity of the scalar curvature in this case is a direct
consequence of the local N = 2 supersymmetry, and therefore it applies to the hypermulti-
plet moduli space after perturbative and non-perturbative quantum corrections are taken
into account as far as we consider the low energy effective theory with minimum number
of derivatives.

Example v) Compactifications to Four Dimensions with N = 1 Supersymmetry

      Little is known about the metric on M in this case. To our knowledge, the conjectures
1, 2, and 4 are consistent with all known examples. (Without information on the metric,
it is difficult to test the conjecture 3 about the curvature of M.) Consider for example the
flux compactifications in [16]. In this construction, the classical superpotential generated
by RR and NS-NS fluxes fixes all of the Kähler moduli and the complex structure moduli.
There is one axion for each complex structure moduli multiplet that cannot be stabilized
by the fluxes. In some models, these axions remain massless to all orders in α′ and gs
expansions. However, in all known examples of this type, there are always instantons of
the appropriate charges to lift all the remaining axions.3 Thus, it appears that there are
obstructions in constructing models with compact moduli spaces with finite diameter (i.e.
with a upper bound on d(p, p0 )) or with non-trivial fundamental group, and we regard this
difficulty as in support of the conjectures 1, 2, and 4.

3.2. Non-Gravitational Counter-Examples

      We claim that the conjectures hold for theories with gravity with finite Planck scale.
It is not difficult to construct non-gravitational field theory models which violate the
conjectures. In this sense our conjectures focus on what aspects of a consistent quantum
theory are required purely from requiring having gravity. For example, if the theory has
a compact global symmetry G, as is typically the case in quantum field theories, and if
it is spontaneously broken to a subgroup H, the moduli space G/H has finite radius and
the conjecture 1 fails in this case. Such spaces can have non-trivial fundamental groups,
violating the conjecture 4 also. Since string theory cannot have any continuous global
symmetry, such an example can exist only in the limit where we decouple gravity. In
the following, we will present examples to show how the violation of the conjectures is
explicitly tied to the decoupling of gravity.
  3
      We thank S. Kachru for discussion on this point.

                                                10
Examples a) Field Theories Living on Flat D-Branes in R10 .

    The gauge theory on flat parallel Dp branes in R10 contains (9 − p) massless scalar
fields in the adjoint representation of the gauge group. If we go to a generic direction
away from the origin of the moduli space, we can go to infinity along geodesic without
encountering extra massless particles. Therefore, this gives an example where the distance
d(p, p0 ) can become infinite (and therefore the conjecture 1 holds), but no new massless
particles appear there (and the conjecture 2 fails). In this case, the gravity degrees of
freedom in the bulk 10 dimensions is decoupled. To have a finite Planck scale in (p + 1)
dimensions along the branes, we need to compactify the transverse direction appropriately.
This will change the structure of the gauge theory moduli space.


Example b) Rigid Limit of N = 2 Theories in Four Dimensions

    We saw in the example v in section 3.1 that, in theories with local N = 2 supsersym-
metries, the sign of curvature of vector multiplet moduli may be indefinite, but the scalar
curvature becomes strictly negative near infinite distance singularities.
    On the other hand, it is straightforward to see that, in non-gravitational theories with
global N = 2 supersymmetry, the Ricci curvature of the vector multiplet moduli space is
positive definite. In this case, the metric can be written as

                              gij̄ = Im τij ,        τij = ∂i ∂j F (z),

where F (z) is the pre-potential. The Ricci curvature then is

                               Rij̄ = −∂i ∂¯j̄ log det g
                                      1
                                    = g kl̄ g mn̄ (∂i τkm )(∂¯j̄ τ̄l̄n̄ ),
                                      4

which is manifestly positive definite. The essential step is to use the fact that gij̄ is the
imaginary part of τij , which is holomorphic in z.
    It is instructive to see how the decoupling of the gravity leads to the positive definite
Ricci curvature. In a theory with local N = 2 supersymmetry, the Kähler potential K for
the moduli space metric is given by [17]
                                                                     
                         K = − log 4F − 4F̄ + z̄ ī ∂i F − z i ∂¯ī F̄ ,

                                                  11
where F (z) is the pre-potential of the gravitational theory. The rigid limit can be taken
by setting
                                      i 2
                                    F (z) =
                                        M + F (z),
                                      8 Pl
and let MP l → ∞. The Kähler potential then becomes, modulo terms that are purely
holomorphic or anti-holomorphic,
                                       1  ī                i¯
                                                                           
                   K = − log iMP2 l +       z̄ ∂ i F (z) − z  ∂ ī F̄ (z̄)   + ···.
                                     iMP2 l
in this limit, the metric gij̄ becomes an imaginary part of the holomorphic τij and the
Ricci curvature is positive definite. This shows how the conjecture 2 can be violated by
taking the decoupling limit MP l → ∞.

Example c) Type II Strings on Non-Compact Calabi-Yau Manifolds with wrapped branes
    Another way to obtain field theories decoupled from gravity is to consider D-branes
on cycles in a non-compact Calabi-Yau manifold M and to take the low energy limit. For
example, consider a brane at a point in M . Though the moduli space metric is not exactly
equal to that of M [18,19], the metric computed using the gauge theory method of [20]
is typically Ricci flat [21]. In particular, its scalar curvature does not necessarily become
negative as we go infinite distance away from the origin of M .
    As another example, consider a non-compact local model of Calabi-Yau manifold with
small P2 . The moduli space of a brane wrapping a 2-cycle in P2 is a copy of P2 (see [22]
for a study of 2 branes in this geometry). Note that this space is compact (violating
conjecture 1) and positively curved (violating conjecture 3). Note that cycles can shrink
in a Calabi-Yau manifold only when they are positively curved. This may be related to
the fact that scalar moduli coupled to gravity tend to be negatively curved, as suggested
in the conjecture 3.

Example d) D-brane Wrapping T 2
    Consider type IIB compactified on T 2 to 8 dimensions. Consider a D5 brane wrapping
T 2 and filling a 3+1 dimensional flat subspace of 8 dimensions. The theory living on this
4 dimensions is a deformed N = 4 Yang-Mills, where out of the 6 scalars, two of them
(corresponding to the Wilson lines on T 2 ) are periodic. The theory on this brane does not
have a dynamical gravity in 4 dimensions (as the transverse dimensions are non-compact)
and we have the moduli space of the theory given by
                                            R4 × T 2
This clearly violates conjecture 4 which states that the moduli space should have no non-
trivial loops. T 2 has non-trivial loops.

                                              12
4. Motivation from Effective Field Theories

    We would like to point out that there are phenomena in a low energy effective theory
coupled to gravity that are closely related the property of moduli spaces discussed in the
above.

4.1. Infinite Distances and Appearance of a Tower of Light States

    The conjecture 2 implies that there is an infinite tower of light particles at infinite
distance from any point inside the moduli space, where the effective field theory in the
interior breaks down, and potentially a new description takes over. This is consistent with
the following field theory fact.
    Suppose there is a field ϕ, whose mass m(φ) is a function of the moduli field φ. We
assume that m(φ) is generically large in the moduli space M so that we can integrate
out ϕ. Now suppose there is a particular point φ0 ∈ M where m(φ0 ) = 0. There the
effective field theory with ϕ integrated out breaks down. To see its effect on the moduli
space metric, let us look at how the one-loop diagram of the ϕ field modifies the kinetic
term of φ. If ϕ is a scalar field, the coupling between ϕ and φ is given by Lint = m(φ)2 ϕ2 ,
and it gives the one-loop correction:

                                one−loop             ∂m ∂m
                               gij       = m(φ)d−4           .
                                                     ∂φi ∂φj
Here d is the spacetime dimensions of the Minkowski space where we are considering the
gravity theory. Consider a point φ1 near φ0 where m(φ1 ) = ǫ ≪ 1 (in Planck units). The
distance to φ1 measured by the quantum corrected metric in the above is given by
                                                2
                                Z
                                    d−4             d−2
                     d(φ, φ1 ) = m 2 dm = −        ǫ 2 + finite.
                                  ǫ           d−2

Thus, a finite number of light particles does not generate infinite distance for d > 2. We
get the same result if the light particle is a fermion ψ with an interaction Lint = m(φ)ψ̄ψ.
    On the other hand, a sum over one-loop effects of an infinite tower of light particles
can produce a distance divergence in a quantum corrected metric. This field theory fact
is consistent with our conjecture that an infinite distance singularity in the moduli space
is correlated to an emergence of an infinite tower of light particles. Note, however, that
we are not claiming that the infinite distance in moduli space is a direct consequence of
having an infinite tower of massless states. Indeed it is possible to show that these are
independent conjectures and one conjecture does not follow from the other. For example,

                                             13
the KK tower of light states (which can affect the distance in moduli space at one loop level)
is not directly related to an infinite distance in the moduli space which is observable at tree
level. Also sometimes there is an infinite tower of light states but at finite distance. This
typically happens at conformal fixed points. For example consider M-theory compactified
on a Calabi-Yau 3-fold near a point in moduli where a P2 inside the Calabi-Yau shrinks
to a point. This leads to an infinite tower of light M2 branes wrapping shrinking cycles in
P2 . Nevertheless the distance in moduli space where P2 shrinks to zero size is finite.

4.2. Observable Regions of Moduli Spaces

     For simplicity, let us consider the case when there is one massless scalar field φ and
choose its parametrization so that the metric in the moduli space is flat: ds2 = MP−2   2
                                                                                    l dφ ,
where MP l is the Planck mass. This means that the value of φ is the geodesic length times
MP l .
     Suppose φ is homogeneous in space. If it were not for gravity, φ would evolve linearly
in time t. If we turn on the gravity and assume that the vacuum energy is dominated
by the kinetic term of φ, we have the Freedman-Robertson-Walker cosmology, where the
Hubble friction slows down the scalar velocity φ̇ = dφ
                                                    dt :

                                                               φ̇2
                                 φ̈ + dH φ̇ = 0,     H2 =            ,
                                                               MP2 l

where d is the spatial dimensions of flat directions. With the initial condition, φ̇(t = 0) = c,
we can integrate this to find
                                                            
                                          MP l          c
                            φ(t) = φ(0) +      log 1 +      t .
                                           d           MP l
In particular, φ(t) grows like log t for large t.
     If this description were valid for all t, the scalar field would continue to grow. However,
the energy density of φ goes as φ̇2 ∼ 1/t2 → 0. Eventually, other sources for H become
relevant. We should then write,
                                                              −2
                             φ̇2
                                                     
                           2      2                      1             2
                         H = 2 + Hothers ∼                          + Hothers ,
                            MP l                         dt
where Hothers represents contributions from other sources. When t ≫ 1/Hothers , the
velocity of the scalar field starts to decay exponentially, φ̇ ∼ exp(−d Hothers t) and the
evolution of φ is shut off. Thus we find that
                                             MP l
                         |φ(t) − φ(0)| ∼ −        log Hothers ,          t → ∞.
                                              d
                                                14
If we identify Hothers with the mass scale ǫ for the low energy effective theory, this takes
the same form as the logarithmic cutoff T < −MP l log ǫ for the geodesic length in the
moduli space. This suggests that the classical evolution of the field φ cannot probe the
region where the low energy effective theory breaks down by the appearance of an infinite
tower of light particles. Similar ideas have been considered in [23,24].
    It is clear from the above discussion that the logarithmic dependence of distance with
the emergence of light mass scale is very natural from the field theory view point. It would
be nice to try to more clearly relate the ideas from field theory with our conjectures about
the appearance of light modes at infinite corners of moduli space.


5. Concluding Thoughts

    We have raised a number of conjectures about the geometry of scalar moduli in a
consistent quantum theory of gravity. We find determination of whether or not these
and similar conjectures are true or false as critical to a deeper understanding of what
constitutes the universality class of quantum gravitational theories. Ultimately we would
need to learn more: Even if we establish they are correct we would need to know why!
This would presumably involve deep questions of gravity, such as questions involved in the
context of black hole. It would be very satisfying if we can relate such geometric questions
on moduli of scalar fields to deeper issues involving black holes and holography. We hope
raising such question will contribute to asking deeper questions in the context of quantum
gravity and how an effective field theory can be possibly consistent with it.


Acknowledgments

    We would like to thank N. Arkani-Hamed for collaboration at an early stage of this
work. In addition we would like to thank D. Calegari, M. Douglas, S. Kachru, Z. Lu,
D. Morrison, L. Motl, A. Neitzke, H. Oh, M. Roček, S. Shenker, A. Strominger, A. Van
Proeyen, and S.-T. Yau for valuable discussions. H.O. is grateful to the theory group of
Harvard University for their hospitality. H.O. also thanks the organizers of the conference
to celebrate the 60th birthday of Michael Green, where a preliminary version of this work
was presented.
    The research of H.O. is supported in part by DOE grant DE-FG03-92-ER40701. The
research of C.V. is supported in part by NSF grants PHY-0244821 and DMS-0244464.

                                             15
                                      References

 [1] C. Vafa, “The string landscape and the swampland,” hep-th/0509212.
 [2] M. R. Douglas and Z. Lu, “Finiteness of volume of moduli spaces,” hep-th/0509224.
 [3] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis and C. Vafa, “The string landscape, black holes
     and gravity as the weakest force,” hep-th/0601001.
 [4] M. R. Douglas, talk at the Strings 2005 Conference, http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/
     audio/05-06/strings/douglas/.
 [5] S. Kachru, J. McGreevy and P. Svrcek, “Bounds on masses of bulk fields in string
     compactifications,” hep-th/0601111.
 [6] D. V. Anosov, “Geodesic flows on closed Romanian manifolds with negative curva-
     ture,” Proc. Steklov Inst. Mathematics 90, 209 (1967).
 [7] E. Hopf, Leipzig Ber. Verhandl. Sächs. Akad. Wiss. 91, 261 (1939); For discussion
     of the ergodicity of geodesic flows in the context of string compactification, see
     G. W. Moore, “Finite in all directions,” hep-th/9305139.
 [8] C. C. Moore, “Ergodicity of flows on homogeneous spaces,” Amer. J. Math., 88 (1966)
     154.
 [9] C. Vafa, “Quantum symmetries of string vacua,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A 4, 1615 (1989).
[10] P. S. Aspinwall and D. R. Morrison, “String theory on K3 surfaces,” hep-th/9404151.
[11] P. Candelas, X. C. De La Ossa, P. S. Green and L. Parkes, “A pair of Calabi-Yau
     manifolds as an exactly soluble superconformal theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 359, 21 (1991).
[12] Z. Lu and X. Sun, “On the Weil-Petersson volume and the first Chern class of the
     moduli space of Calabi-Yau manifolds,” Commun. Math. Phys. 261, 297 (2006);
     math.dg/0510021.
[13] E. A. Rodland, “The Pfaffian Calabi-Yau, its mirror, and their link to the Grassman-
     nian G(2, 7),” Compositio Math. 122, 135 (2000).
[14] J. A. Wolf, “Complex homogeneous contact manifolds and quarternionic symmetric
     spaces,” J. Math. Mech. 14, 1033 (1965).
[15] J. Bagger and E. Witten, “Matter couplings in N = 2 supergravity,” Nucl. Phys. B
     222, 1 (1983).
[16] O. DeWolfe, A. Giryavets, S. Kachru and W. Taylor, “Type IIA moduli stabilization,”
     JHEP 0507, 066 (2005); hep-th/0505160.
[17] B. de Wit and A. Van Proeyen, “Potentials and symmetries of general gauged N = 2
     supergravity - Yang-Mills models,” Nucl. Phys. B 245, 89 (1984).
[18] M. R. Douglas, H. Ooguri and S. H. Shenker, “Issues in (M)atrix model compactifi-
     cation,” Phys. Lett. B 402, 36 (1997); hep-th/9702203.
[19] M. R. Douglas and H. Ooguri, “Why matrix theory is hard,” Phys. Lett. B 425, 71
     (1998); hep-th/9710178.

                                           16
[20] M. R. Douglas and G. W. Moore, “D-branes, quivers, and ALE instantons,” hep-
     th/9603167.
[21] M. R. Douglas and B. R. Greene, “Metrics on D-brane orbifolds,” Adv. Theor. Math.
     Phys. 1, 184 (1998); hep-th/9707214.
[22] S. Katz, A. Klemm and C. Vafa, “M-theory, topological strings and spinning black
     holes,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 3, 1445 (1999); hep-th/9910181.
[23] T. Banks, “A critique of pure string theory: Heterodox opinions of diverse dimensions,”
     hep-th/0306074.
[24] T. Banks, M. Dine and E. Gorbatov, “Is there a string theory landscape?,” JHEP
     0408, 058 (2004); hep-th/0309170.




                                             17
