                                           Coupled and Extended Quintessence: theoretical differences and structure formation
                                                                                    Valeria Pettorino1 , Carlo Baccigalupi2
                                             1
                                                 Institut für Theoretische Physik, Universität Heidelberg, Philosophenweg 16, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
                                                                              2
                                                                                SISSA/ISAS, Via Beirut 4, I-34014 Trieste, and
                                                                        INFN, Sezione di Trieste, Via Valerio 2, I-34127 Trieste, Italy.
                                                           The case of a coupling between dark energy and matter (Coupled Quintessence) or gravity (Ex-
                                                        tended Quintessence) has recently attracted a deep interest and has been widely investigated both in
                                                        the Einstein and in the Jordan frames (EF, JF), within scalar tensor theories. Focusing on the sim-
                                                        plest models proposed so far, in this paper we study the relation existing between the two scenarios,
                                                        isolating the Weyl scaling which allows to express them in the EF and JF. Moreover, we perform
arXiv:0802.1086v2 [astro-ph] 21 May 2008




                                                        a comparative study of the behavior of linear perturbations in both scenarios, which turn out to
                                                        behave in a markedly different way. In particular, while the clustering is enhanced in the considered
                                                        CQ models with respect to the corresponding Quintessence ones where the coupling is absent and to
                                                        the ordinary cosmologies with a Cosmological Constant and Cold Dark Matter (ΛCDM), structures
                                                        in EQ models may grow slower. This is likely to have direct consequences on the inner properties
                                                        of non-linear structures, like cluster concentration, as well as on the weak lensing shear on large
                                                        scales. Finally, we specialize our study for interfacing linear dynamics and N-body simulations in
                                                        these cosmologies, giving a recipe for the corrections to be included in N-body codes in order to take
                                                        into account the modifications to the expansion rate, growth of structures, and strength of gravity.


                                                                                             I.   INTRODUCTION

                                              The increasing amount of cosmological observations has been recently pointing out that the Universe is nearly
                                           spatially flat, with an expansion rate of about 70 km/s/Mpc and with a 76% contribution to the total energy density
                                           due to a non-clustered, negative pressure component responsible for the acceleration in the cosmic expansion, known
                                           as dark energy. The energy level of this component is markedly lower than almost all known physical quantities, except
                                           perhaps the neutrino mass differences, and this motivated big efforts in order to understand its physical properties.
                                           Interesting hints have been obtained studying scenarios in which the dark energy is dynamic, i.e. described by an
                                           evolving and fluctuating scalar field, the Quintessence. In particular, several investigations have been devoted to
                                           study the possibility that the dark energy might be coupled to other entities in the Universe, altering the dynamics
                                           of the Quintessence field itself as well as the evolution of structure formation. It is then essential to understand the
                                           impact of such a coupling on both cosmological expansion and perturbation dynamics, in view of a clear prediction
                                           of observable effects for the next to come experiments.
                                           Two main efforts have been recently carried out in a nearly parallel way. On one side, within the usual framework
                                           of General Relativity (Einstein Frame, EF) the effect of a coupling between dark energy and dark matter (Coupled
                                           Quintessence, CQ) has been deeply investigated both in the linear [1] and non-linear regimes [2, 3], including the
                                           effects of such models on the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) [4, 5, 6], on Supernovae [7, 8, 9], on the matter
                                           power spectrum [10], on structure formation [11, 12], also via N-body simulation [13], as well as different choices of
                                           the coupling [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. The possibility of an interaction between dark energy and neutrinos has also been
                                           investigated [20, 21], leading recently to the proposal of growing matter scenarios [22, 23, 24]. Instabilities within
                                           coupled dark energy theories have also been addressed [25, 26, 27].
                                           On the other side, a wide variety of analysis has been carried out for evaluating the possibility that the gravity
                                           perceived by dark energy and matter deviates from General Relativity (GR). In this latter case, extensions of GR
                                           have been considered, in which the dark energy might derive from a non-minimal interaction to gravity via an explicit
                                           coupling between Quintessence and the Ricci scalar (Jordan Frame, JF). This is the case of scalar tensor theories
                                           [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40], which are known as Extended Quintessence (EQ) scenarios in the
                                           framework of dark energy. One of the most interesting results in this framework consists in the so called ‘gravitational
                                           dragging’ [36]: the coupling to gravity introduces an effective potential in which the quintessence scalar field rolls,
                                           acquiring a dynamics which is a purely gravitational effect. Eventually, EQ energy density perturbations can be
                                           dragged to cluster through the coupling with the gravitational potential activated by the dark matter, its density
                                           perturbations reaching non-linearity at scales and redshifts relevant for the structure formation process. In particular,
                                           the growth of dark energy perturbations in the non-linear regime within EQ has been addressed in [40].
                                           Furthermore, in the case in which, in the EF, dark energy couples universally to all matter fields, the two parallel
                                           investigations can also be conformally related by Weyl scaling, which allows to go univoquely from one representation
                                           to the other. Although the resulting physical effects must be equivalently present in both frames, some features might
                                           more naturally appear in one representation than in the other and viceversa.
                                                                                                                          2

In this paper, we identify the theoretical relation between the simplest and most popular examples of both coupling
choices for CQ and EQ. On the basis of this analysis, we work out the main phenomenological differences in terms of
the growth of linear perturbations, which turn out to behave in a markedly different way for the two models considered.
Finally, we propagate our investigation to the inputs required by N-body simulations in view of future applications,
giving a table of the modifications required in both scenarios for taking into account the modified growth rate of
perturbations and the strength of gravity. This work is organized as follows: we first devote sec.(II) to Weyl scaling,
recalling how it is possible to relate EQ to CQ via a conformal transformation; afterwards, in (sec.III) we investigate
the background dynamics, comparing CQ in the simple case of a constant coupling (III A) and EQ in scalar tensor
theories (III B); we then proceed by studying linear perturbations (sec.IV), again presented within both cosmological
approaches (IV A, IV B). We will then point out in particular, how in the newtonian limit (V) the Euler equation is
modified (sec.V A, sec.V B), in view of N-body simulations to be realized in both frameworks and for which we specify
the required corrections (sec.V C). Finally in (sec.VI) we compare the results and set our conclusions.


                                                 II.   WEYL SCALING

  Before handling a parallel analysis of the background and linear perturbations in CQ and EQ models, it is compelling
to clarify the fact that the two frameworks are strictly related through a conformal transformation called Weyl scaling
[41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46]. It is important to stress that altering General Relativity via scalar tensor theory (Jordan frame,
JF) is equivalent to coupling a scalar field universally with all matter fields within General Relativity (Einstein frame,
EF). Although the two reference frames must lead to identical observable effects, the description of the same model
can in fact rely on different and unequally simple equations when seen in the two frames. In this sense, simplicity
and naturalness of one frame are not in general preserved in the other one. Going from one frame to the other and
viceversa according to the model, profiting of this frame equivalence, can therefore represent a valuable tool to easily
explore a wider set of choices for the coupling functions and the potentials involved: a nasty choice in one frame
might, in other words, look much simpler in the other frame, allowing us to easily stress remarkably new features,
more difficult to achieve in the frame of origin. A frame-independent approach has also been considered [45] leading to
a reformulation of the Boltzmann equation and linear perturbation theory in terms of frame-independent quantities.
Authors usually refer to CQ models when they consider a quintessence scalar field coupled, in the Einstein frame, to
the dark matter fields. The action considered in this case usually appears as follows:
                                       √
                                                                                                
                                               1      1
                                 Z
                           S = d4 x −g           R − Z(φ)φ;µ φ;µ − U (φ) − m(φ)ψ̄ψ + Lkin,ψ ,                            (1)
                                              2κ      2
where g is the determinant of the background metric, R is the Ricci scalar, κ = 8πG where G represents the
gravitational constant, as found in Cavendish like experiments. In the assumption of flat Friedmann Robertson
Walker (FRW) cosmologies, the line element can be written as ds2 = − dt2 + a2 (t)δij dxi dxj , where a(t) is the scale
factor and t represents the cosmic time variable. The choice of m(φ) specifies the coupling to ψ matter fields while
Lkin,ψ includes kinetic contributions from all components different from φ.
In the Jordan frame, a scalar tensor theory in which EQ holds is in general described by the following action:

                                4 √
                                                                                          
                                           1           1
                            Z
                                                             ;µ
                       S = d x −g            f (φ, R) − Z(φ)φ φ;µ − U (φ) − m0 ψ̄ψ + Lkin,ψ .                      (2)
                                          2κ           2
The scalar field φ characterizing the generalized gravitational interaction has its kinetic energy and potential specified
by Z(φ) and U (φ), respectively. In this case the mass m0 is a constant and does not depend on the scalar field φ.
Note that we consider here natural units, c = 1. Compared to general relativity, the Lagrangian has been generalized
by introducing an explicit coupling between the Ricci scalar and the scalar field, achieved by replacing the usual
ricci scalar R with the function f (φ, R). This new term, which has the effect of introducing a spacetime dependent
gravitational constant, may either be interpreted as an explicit coupling between the quintessence field φ and gravity
(or equivalently, in the Einstein frame, between dark energy and matter), or as a pure geometrical modification
of general relativity admitting a non-linear dependence on R [59]. For simplicity, the classes of theories in which
f (φ, R) assumes the simple form f (φ, R)/2 = κF (φ)R/2 have been widely considered in the context of dark energy
cosmologies.
Weyl scaling consists in a conformal transformation of the metric which, joined to a redefinition of matter fields,
allows to rewrite action (2) into (1) or viceversa:

                                       gµν = A2 (φ)g̃µν                                                                 (3)
                                                                                                                      3

                                      g µν = A−2 (φ)g̃ µν ,                                                         (4)

                                     √
                                      −g = A4 (φ) −g̃ ,
                                                 p
                                                                                                                    (5)

                                        R = [A(φ)]−2 {R̃ − 6g̃ µν (ln A);ν (ln A);µ } ,                             (6)

                                         ψ = A−3/2 (φ)ψ̃ ,                                                          (7)

where we have used the ˜ to identify quantities in the EF and distinguish them from those in the JF. Note also that
the scaling factor A(φ) is related to the coupling F (φ) via the following relation:
                                                                    1
                                                      A2 (φ) =           .                                          (8)
                                                                  κF (φ)

When applying Weyl scaling to the action (2) with Z(φ)1 for simplicity, we obtain that the rescaled action appears
to be

                              4 √
                                                                                         
                                         1     1
                          Z
                     S̃ = d x −g                      ;µ                   ˜
                                           R̃ − Z̃(φ)φ φ;µ − Ũ (φ) − m(φ)ψ̄ ψ̃ + L̃kin,ψ̃ ,                   (9)
                                        2κ     2
where
                                                                                !
                                                         2     6 A2,φ
                                             Z̃(φ) = A (φ) 1 +                      ,                              (10)
                                                               κ A4 (φ)


                                                    Ũ (φ) = A4 (φ)U (φ) ,                                         (11)

and both the mass and the kinetic term for matter fields now also depend on φ:

                                                       m(φ) = m0 A(φ)                                              (12)


                                                               ˜ γ̃ µ ∇ ψ̃ + i 3 A,φ ψ̄γ̃
                                   L̃kin,ψ̃ (ψ̃, φ, g̃ µν ) − iψ̄                     ˜ µ ∇ ψ̃ .                   (13)
                                                                       µ                   µ
                                                                               2 A(φ)

Note that the non standard kinetic term Z̃ in (10) is always positive and one could further re-absorb it by redefining
the scalar field φ implicitly into ϕ in such a way that:
                                                     2
                                                      ∂ϕ
                                                          ≡ Z̃(φ) .                                               (14)
                                                      ∂φ

This allows to rewrite action (9) in the usual form:
                                      √
                                                                                           
                                              1      1
                                Z
                           S̃ = d4 x −g                                     ˜ ψ̃ + L̃
                                                R̃ − ϕ;µ ϕ;µ − Ũ (ϕ) − m(ϕ)ψ̄                .                    (15)
                                                                                     kin,ψ̃
                                             2κ      2

We have now all the means to find out, given a certain action (2) in the Jordan frame, which is the equivalent action
(15) in the Einstein frame. In the parallel analysis that will follow in this paper, we will eventually refer to two
particular choices of the coupling in CQ and EQ scenarios. In particular, we will consider two of the simplest and
most popular choices, that is to say a quadratic coupling in the Jordan frame for EQ [34, 40, 43, 47] and an exponential
coupling in the Einstein frame for CQ [1, 2]. In order to have a feeling of a possible comparison between the two
different models, we illustrate here how they look like in the same, Einstein, frame, after Weyl scaling a quadratic EQ
model.
In the case of EQ with a quadratic coupling, we will work with so called ‘non-minimally coupled’ theories, widely used
in previous works on this topic (see [34] and references therein), in which F (φ) is the sum of a dominant constant
term plus a piece depending on φ:
                                                                1
                                                    F (φ) ≡        + ξφ2 .                                         (16)
                                                              8πG∗
                                                                                                                        4

Here κ∗ ≡ 8πG∗ , where G∗ represents the ‘bare’ gravitational constant [42], which is in general different from
G and is set in such a way that locally 1/κ + ξφ2local = 1/(8πG) in order to match local constraints on General
Relativity.determined by a combination of G∗ and the local value of f (φ, R) such that G ≡ G∗ R  f |local . In order to
recover the equivalent action in the Einstein frame, we apply equations (8, 10, 11, 12), thus obtaining action (9) in
which:
                                                          1
                                           Z̃(φ) = G          2
                                                                + 6κξ 2 φ2 ,                                       (17)
                                                     G ∗ + κξφ
                                                               1
                                            Ũ (φ) =                     U (φ) ,                                   (18)
                                                       G          2 2
                                                          G∗ + κξφ
                                                               m0
                                            m(φ) = q                         .                                       (19)
                                                            G       2
                                                            G∗ + κξφ

Notably, in this frame the coupling to matter fields, the kinetic term and the potential do not look as straightforward
as in the original action.
Another very popular choice is represented by Induced Gravity (IG) [34, 43, 47, 48], in which only the quadratic
coupling
                                                          F (φ) = ξφ2                                                (20)
is considered and no constant term is present. It can be easily seen, by applying equations (8, 10, 11, 12) that in this
case we recover action (9) in which:
                                                             1
                                                 Z̃(φ) =         (1 + 6ξ) ,                                          (21)
                                                            κξφ2
                                                               1
                                                 Ũ (φ) =               U (φ) ,                                      (22)
                                                            κ2 ξ 2 φ4
                                                         m0
                                                 m(φ) = p     .                                                      (23)
                                                         κξφ2
In this case it is also straightforward to solve equation (14) analytically, obtaining
                                                          φ = DeCϕ ,                                        (24)
                                                              p
for φ > 0, where C and D are constants and we have defined C ≡ ξ/(1 + 6ξ). The latter expression, substituted in
(22, 23) allows to recover action (15) in which:
                                                           D4 −Cϕ
                                               Ũ (ϕ) =          e U (φ(ϕ)) ,                                        (25)
                                                          κ2 ξ 2
                                                      m0 D
                                               m(ϕ) = √ e−Cϕ .                                                       (26)
                                                       κξ
Applying Weyl scaling to IG theories, leads, as expected [43, 48], to CQ models in which the mass of matter fields
depends exponentially on the scalar field ϕ. We therefore recover the simplest and most popular choice in CQ
investigations [1] and we will ourself adopt this choice in this paper when dealing with CQ in the Einstein frame.
Furthermore, since U (φ) is usually almost constant in order to match the present constraints on the amount of
Quintessence, the transformed potential in the Einstein frame behaves as an exponential.
As appears clear from the previous analysis, IG theories in the Jordan frame (or equivalently CQ models in the Einstein
frame with an exponential coupling in the Lagrangian) have a crucial difference from the non-minimal coupling choice
described by eq.(16) in the Jordan frame. Indeed, IG (or CQ with an exponential coupling) forces the coupling
constant ξ to be positive in order to get the right sign for attractive gravity in action (2); on the contrary, the choice
(16) also allows negative values of ξ and can therefore lead to an opposite correction to background and perturbation
dynamics, as we will see in detail in the following section.


                                        III.    BACKGROUND DYNAMICS

  In this Section we define the CQ and EQ models we study in the following, and review their dynamics for what
concerns the cosmic expansion, highlighting the aspects which will be relevant for the behavior of linear perturbations.
                                                                                                                          5

                                               A.     Coupled dark energy

   We will follow as much as possible previous works on this topic [1, 3], considering the simplest models in which the
dark energy scalar field and CDM are coupled via a constant coupling appearing in the conservation equations.
The equations used to describe the background evolution of each component (α) involved in the interaction follow
from the consideration [49] that the coupling can be treated as an external source acting on each stress energy tensor
T µ ν(α) in such a way that the total stress energy tensor is conserved:
                                                     µ
                                                    Tν;µ (c) = −Cc Tc φ;ν                                              (27)

                                                     µ
                                                    Tν;µ (φ) = Cc Tc φ;ν ,                                             (28)

where Cc is a constant, Tc is the trace of T µ ν(c) and the subscripts (c) , (φ) stand for CDM and dark energy respectively.
Baryons do not couple with dark matter or dark energy. The constant coupling term here used can be achieved starting
from the following Lagrangian:

                                     4 √
                                                                                             
                                                 1      1 ;µ
                                 Z
                            S = d x −g              R − φ φ;µ − U (φ) − m(φ)ψ̄ψ + Lkin,ψ ,                             (29)
                                                2κ      2

in which the mass of cold dark matter fields depends exponentially on φ [58]:

                                                     m(φ) = m0 e−Cc φ ,                                                (30)

thus corresponding, in the JF, to IG cosmologies, as seen at the end of the previous section. Here, for simplicity, we
do not include the baryonic component.
Equations (27,28) specialized for ν = 0, provide the conservation equations for the energy densities of each component,
given by ρ′c = −3Hρc − Cc ρc φ′ and ρ′φ = −3Hhφ + Cc ρc φ′ for the two coupled species and ρ′r = −4Hρr since Cr = 0
for radiation. ρr takes into account the radiation contribution, including
                                                                       ′
                                                                           both photons and neutrinos, both decoupled
from the other species. We have further defined hφ ≡ pa + ρa = φ 2 /a2 where the latter equality comes from the
expression of the energy density ρφ defined from the (0, 0) component of the stress energy tensor present in (28) and
therefore given by the usual
                                                              ′2
                                                           1φ
                                                    ρφ =        + U (φ) ,                                              (31)
                                                           2 a2
where U (φ) is the potential in which the dark energy scalar field rolls. Note that ρφ is still equal to the standard one
characterizing uncoupled quintessence models since, as we have seen, the coupling is provided in (27, 28) as an external
contribution to the standard stress energy tensor; nevertheless, unlike what happens in the uncoupled quintessence
case, only the sum ρc + ρφ is conserved while ρφ is not conserved by itself.
Analogously, the pressure of the quintessence scalar field is defined as:
                                                              ′2
                                                           1φ
                                                    pφ =        − U (φ) .                                              (32)
                                                           2 a2
For what concerns the background dynamics, the evolution of the scalar field is described by the Klein Gordon
equation, which reads as follows:

                                             φ′′ + 2Hφ′ + a2 U,φ = a2 Cc ρc ,                                          (33)

where U,φ is the derivative of the potential with respect to φ.
The CDM conservation equation can be formally integrated out
                                                           ρc0 −Cc (φ−φ0 )
                                                    ρc =      e                                                        (34)
                                                           a3
giving the dependence of ρc from the scale parameter, once that the dynamics of φ(a) is known.
The evolution in time of the scale factor is provided by the usual Friedmann equation, so that:
                                                             ρc + ρφ + ρr
                                                 H 2 ≡ a2                 .                                            (35)
                                                                   3
                                                                                                                          6

For convenience we have defined ρ̂ ≡ 8πGρ = ρ/M 2 and φ̂ ≡ φ/M in units of the reduced Planck mass M 2 ≡ 1/8πG =
MP 2 /8π where G is the gravitational constant. The coupling constant Ĉ ≡ CM is therefore dimensionless; we have
then omitted theˆand redefined ρ̂ ≡ ρ, φ̂ ≡ φ and Ĉ ≡ C for simplicity.
A detailed analysis of the background has already been addressed in [1] in the case in which U (φ) is an exponential
and in [3, 8, 13] for a more general treatment. In particular, the critical points of the trajectories in the phase space
of the system have been widely investigated in [1]. We just recall here that in the case in which both the potential
U (φ) and radiation√ are√ neglected, it is straightforward to find the critical points of the system, corresponding to
dφcrit /dα = (− 6, + 6, 2 Cc ) where we have defined α = log [a(τ )]. The third critical point is the only one
providing a stable attractor during matter dominated era (MDE) [1] 1 along which the evolution of the dark energy
scalar field follows the trajectory

                                                         φ(a) = 2Cc log a + φ0 ,                                       (36)

where we have put todays value of the scale parameter equal to a0 = 1. Substituting in (34), we get:
                                                                    ρc0 −2Cc 2
                                                             ρc =      a       .                                       (37)
                                                                    a3
We can now make use of the Friedmann equation, specified in the case in which there is no radiation and the potential
is negligible, to obtain the scale parameter dependence on the conformal time during MDE:
                                                             h      i
                                                                               2
                                                                                 2
                                                                             1+2Cc
                                                          aMDE (τ ) ∝ τ                                                (38)

as well as H(τ ):
                                                                            2    1
                                                        HMDE (τ ) =            2
                                                                                   ,                                   (39)
                                                                         1 + 2Cc τ
                                                                                  2
or equivalently, in terms of the cosmic time aMDE (t) ∝ t[2/(3+2Cc )] and HMDE (t) = 2/[(3 + 2Cc2 )t]. We stress here
that, as we can see from the four latter expressions, the effect of the coupling on the Hubble parameter and on the
scale factor during MDE, when the potential is negligible, does not depend on the sign of the constant Cc , both of
them being only a function of Cc2 . With this choice of the coupling, we can thus only have a one direction effect,
being that of slowing down the universe expansion with respect to the standard case in which Cc = 0.
We can numerically solve the equations describing the background, in order to obtain the full evolution of the energy
densities of both cold dark matter and the scalar field, as shown in fig.(1). In the left panel, the energy densities of a
cosmological constant (dotted), radiation (long dashed), CDM (solid) and coupled quintessence (dashed) in the case
in which C = 0.05 have been plotted. We have used an inverse power law shape for the potential U (φ) which was
first proposed in [50] and often used in quintessence models since then [51, 52]:
                                                                                λ
                                                                            φ0
                                                           U (φ) = U0                 ,                                (40)
                                                                            φ

where φ0 is the value of the scalar field today and λ will be typically fixed to ∼ 0.2 in order to have a flat potential and
a consequent equation of state for dark energy which is close to −1 today, in order to be consistent with observations
[53, 54, 55]. Another popular choice is given by an exponential potential [1, 57, 58], though we are not interested
here in the explicit expression of U (φ), which does not modify our considerations. The amplitude of the potential
(40) and the initial amount of CDM are fixed in order to have their values today again in agreement with the present
constraints [53, 54, 55]. As shown in fig.(1) (left panel), the presence of the coupling has a drastic effect on the
behavior of the scalar field energy density. In the uncoupled case quintessence behaves pretty much as a cosmological
constant due to the rather flat potential. If however the coupling to CDM is active, φ accelerates and the dark energy
density is attracted by the evolution of the species to which it is coupled: in particular, after a period of transition
due to the particular choices of the initial conditions, ρ̄φ is dragged by CDM to follow a trajectory which strictly
mimics the CDM path, therefore behaving as an effective pressureless component. We will refer to this effect as ‘dark
matter dragging’ in analogy to the ‘gravitational dragging’ first discussed in [36] in which the coupling of the scalar
field to gravity via a modification of General Relativity imprinted a similar pattern to the scalar field dynamics, both



1 The three critical points correspond to the last three critical points in table 1 in [1].
                                   6                                                             25                                                                              7
                           10                                                               10




              ρ [ Mpc ]




                                                                                ρ [ Mpc ]
              -2




                                                                                -2
                                   4
                           10                                                                    19
                                                                                            10
                                   2
                           10
                                                                                                 13
                                                                                            10
                               1
                                   -2
                                                                                                  7
                          10                                                                 10
                                   -4
                          10
                                                                                             10
                                   -6
                          10
                                                                                                  -5
                                   -8                                                       10
                          10
                               -10                                                               -11
                          10                                                                10
                               -12
                          10                                 2              3                                        2        3        4        5        6        7        8
                                        1   10          10             10                              1   10   10       10       10       10       10       10       10
                                                 1+ z                                                                             1+ z




FIG. 1: Energy densities of CDM and dark energy. The left panel shows the case of coupled dark energy for C = 0.05 as well
as for C = 0 vs 1 + z, where z is the redshift. The right panel shows the case of extended quintessence for both positive and
negative coupling corresponding to ωJ BD0 ∼ 30. During MDE the energy density of the scalar field (the non conserved one) is
more enhanced in the case of coupled dark energy than in extended quintessence, in which the dynamics of the R-boost has its
major influence during RDE. The plotted densities are in units of M pc−2 .


on background and on perturbations. In this scenario, the matter scaling is also modified by the coupling with the
field; the resulting regime of cosmological expansion driven by the field and CDM tracking each other, is known as
φCDM era, see [3] and references therein.
   In both models here considered, φ rolls down an effective potential provided by the coupling to dark matter (right
hand side of eq.33) or by modified gravity (right hand side of equation 44, next paragraph). Note however that
despite the analogy with gravitational dragging, during dark matter dragging the dark energy scalar field does not
exactly slow roll on the effective potential, as it happens in the gravitational dragging case: when the coupling to
dark matter is considered, φ acquires a strong acceleration from the dark matter field, that makes terms like φ′′ give
a non negligible contribution in equation (33), an occurrence which is absent in the EQ case, as we now discuss.


                                                        B.       Extended quintessence

  As illustrated in the first section, scalar tensor theories are described by action (2) that we rewrite here for conve-
nience:

                                    4 √
                                                                                            
                                               1           1 ;µ
                                Z
                           S = d x −g            f (φ, R) − φ φ;µ − U (φ) − m0 ψ̄ψ + Lkin,ψ .                        (41)
                                              2κ           2

We have chosen Z(φ) = 1 to simplify the notation. We further set f (φ, R) = κF (φ)R so that the function F (φ) fully
specifies the explicit coupling to gravity via its dependence on some scalar field φ. When the additional scalar field
introduced in the coupling plays today the role of the dark energy field, leading to an accelerated expansion of the
universe, we refer to it as extended quintessence, see [37] and references therein. The limit of general relativity is
achieved with ωJBD ≫ 1 where ωJBD is defined as
                                                                                 F
                                                                  ωJBD ≡             ,                                                                                         (42)
                                                                                Fφ 2

and Fφ is the derivative of F with respect to φ. The current constraints set the present value ωJBD0 to be larger than
40000 in the Solar System [60], and greater than about 120 from cosmology [61]; being on markedly different spacetime
scales, the two are considered as independent and complementary [62]. Within these theories, the Friedmann equation
describing the expansion of the Universe is modified with respect to the usual case:
                                       ′ 2                                          !
                                                                    2
                                  2     a       a2             1 φ′             3HF ′
                                H =          =       ρf luid +        + U (φ) −         .                          (43)
                                        a       3F             2 a2              a2
                                                                                                                        8

Besides the extra term at the end of (43), which is usually quantitatively negligible, the most important effect to point
out is the presence of the multiplying factor 1/F substituting the usual 8πG; as a consequence, extended quintessence
behave as theories in which gravity depends on a varying function and not on a gravitational constant anymore. Note
that now all fluids but φ satisfy the usual conservation equation ρ′ α = −3Hhα including CDM, which now scales as
ρc = ρc0 /a3 . The evolution of the scalar field is explicited by the Klein Gordon equation, which again gets contribution
from the coupling to gravity, enhancing the background dynamics of φ and giving rise to the R-boost effect illustrated
in [63]

                                                                    a2
                                            φ′′ + 2Hφ′ + a2 U,φ =      F,φ R ,                                       (44)
                                                                    2
where F,φ and U,φ are the derivatives of the coupling F (φ) and of the quintessence potential U (φ) with respect to
φ. The term on the right hand side has the effect of altering the potential U (φ) into an effective potential in which
the scalar field rolls. This effect, responsible for the gravitational dragging [36], is analogue to the one produced by
the right hand side of equation (33) due to the coupling to matter fields, within the Einstein frame, as shown in
fig.(1 right panel): here we plot the energy densities of radiation (long dashed), CDM (solid) and EQ in the case
in which the coupling to gravity is positive (dashed) or negative (dotted). The energy density of the scalar field
has a similar behavior during RDE (R-boost effect), independently of the sign of ξ, while the two patterns detach
a bit during MDE. The plot has been obtained solving numerically the equations for the background in the case of
non-minimal coupling, with F (φ) given by (16). Again, the effect of the coupling on the background evolution is
that of enhancing the amount of dark energy in the past, due to the gravitational dragging set on by the additional
term in the Klein Gordon equation (44). Though in the quadratic case the gravitational dragging shows in particular
during RDE, note that the time at which the dragging ends depends on the choice of the model and on the values
of the coupling parameter. An exponential coupling in the lagrangian would have a bigger effect, lasting up to MDE
and more recent times [39]. Although the phenomenology and the energy density scaling is clearly analogous for the
CQ and EQ models plotted in fig.(1), it is important to stress here that the sign of the coupling leads however to a
different correction in the Hubble expansion parameter. Indeed, while in coupled dark energy the Hubble parameter
does not depend on the sign of the coupling constant during MDE (eq.39), in extended quintessence a positive and a
negative coupling lead to different sign corrections, either enhancing or reducing the Hubble parameter with respect
to the standard LCDM case. The effect is shown in fig.(2): here we plot the hubble parameter versus redshift for
LCDM (solid), coupled quintessence with C = 0.1 (dotted) and extended quintessence with a positive (long dashed)
or negative (dashed) coupling. For the chosen coupled quintessence model, with a constant coupling, the hubble
parameter is bigger in the past than the usual LCDM case, independently of the sign of the coupling constant. The
chosen extended quintessence case, instead, can lead to both higher and lower values in the past, depending on the
sign of the coupling. Note also that the switch in sign does not lead to perfectly opposite contributions: when the
coupling is negative the effect is bigger than in the case of a positive coupling with the same absolute value. A reason
for this to happen might be that in the first case the extra term in the Klein Gordon equation adds to the usual
potential, favoring an easier enhancement of the dynamics of the field; on the contrary, for a positive constant, the
extra term contrasts the effect of V (φ), making it more difficult to enhance the dynamics of the field.
   Finally, we recall that in this context, the Ricci scalar can be written in terms of the cosmological content of the
Universe
                                      "                                                   #
                                                             φ′ 2
                                                                            ′′
                                    1                                       F      2HF ′
                            R=−         −ρf luid + 3pf luid + 2 − 4 U + 3       +              ,                    (45)
                                    F                        a               a2      a2

where ρf luid and pf luid are the energy density and pressure summed up over all possible cosmological components
but φ.


                                         IV.   LINEAR PERTURBATIONS

  Here we perform a comparative analysis of the behavior of linear perturbations in the two scenarios. As we show
in a moment, the main difference highlighted in the previous section persist at this level, as in the Newtonian limit
which is outlined below.
                                                                                                                       9
                                                     0.4




                                       H [ Mpc-1]
                                                    0.35

                                                     0.3

                                                    0.25

                                                     0.2

                                                    0.15

                                                     0.1

                                                    0.05

                                                      0
                                                           0           50            100          150   200
                                                                                          z


FIG. 2: Hubble parameter vs redshift for CQ and EQ with a non minimal coupling (for positive and negative couplings). The
case of ΛCDM is also shown for reference. The value of ξ corresponds to ωJ BD0 ∼ 30. H is in units of M pc−1 .



                                                           A.   Coupled dark energy

  The linearized perturbation equations can be derived, following the notation of [49], from
                                                               µ
                                                            δ(Tν;µ (α) ) = δ(Qν (α) ) ,                             (46)

with Qν (α) = (−aQα , 0) being the source term for the α−component. In particular, comparing with eq.(27) and
eq.(28), for the case of a constant coupling here considered the source is defined as:

                                                                             Cc ρ̄c φ̄′
                                                                 Qφ ≡                                               (47)
                                                                                a

                                                                 Qc ≡ −Qφ                 .                         (48)

For ν = 0 one gets the perturbed energy conservation equations, while for ν = i (spatial index) we can recover the
first order Euler equations. In the Newtonian gauge in which the non-diagonal metric perturbations are fixed to zero,
the linearized conservation equations for the matter component and for the scalar field, respectively, read as follows:

                                 δρ′c + 3Hδρc + ρ̄c kvc + 3ρ̄c Φ′ = −Cc (ρ̄c δφ′ + φ̄′ δρc ) ,                      (49)

                                                       vc′ + (H − Cc φ̄′ )vc = −k(Φ + Cc δφ)            ,           (50)

                       δρ′φ + 3H(δρφ + δpφ ) + k h̄φ vφ + 3h̄φ Φ′ = Cc (ρ̄c δφ′ + φ̄′ δρc ) ,                       (51)

                                          h̄φ vφ′ + (h̄′φ + 4Hh̄φ )vφ = kδpφ − k h̄φ Φ + Cc k ρ̄c δφ          ,     (52)

                                               4
                               δρ′r + 4Hδρr + k ρ̄r vr + 4ρ̄r Φ′ = 0                          ,                     (53)
                                               3
                                                                            k
                                                                ρ̄r vr′ −     δρr = −k ρ̄r Φ        ,               (54)
                                                                            4

where k is the wavenumber, vα is the velocity perturbation (along the direction of ~k) for the α species and Φ is
the gravitational potential coming from the metric perturbation; in particular Φ = −Ψ if we neglect the anisotropic
                                                                                                                    10

stress. Note that the latter is rigorously zero for the present scenario, as opposed to the EQ case as we will see in a
moment. Thus the only source of that here is represented by neutrinos, due to their viscosity for having decoupled
in a markedly relativistic regime. Also note that the two latter equations hold only if we neglect baryons, otherwise
Thomson scattering with photons should be taken into account. A more convenient way to express equation (49) is
to rewrite it in terms of δc ≡ δρc /ρc as

                                              δc′ + kvc + 3Φ′ = −Cc δφ′ .                                         (55)

The gravitational potential Φ is related to the background and perturbed densities and velocities of the various
components via the following expression:

                             a2        a2
                                                                                       
                                                            H           4
                       Φ = 2 ρ∆ = 2 δρc + δρφ + δρr + 3         ρ̄c vc + ρ̄r vr + h̄φ vφ    .               (56)
                            2k        2k                     k          3
Or, equivalently, in a more compact form and in terms of the Ω(α) as
                                               "                            #
                                           3 2 X
                                      Φ= λ          Ωi (δi + 3(1 + ωi )λvi ) ,                                    (57)
                                           2      i

where we have defined λ ≡ H/k and where Ωc = (a2 ρc )/(3H2 ) and the sum is extended to all components, including
dark energy. Note that dark energy perturbations contribute to the gravitational potential and therefore on the dark
matter perturbations through eq.(55).
Deriving with respect to the conformal time, making use of equations (49, 50, 51, 52) as well as of the background
conservation equations and substituting the expression of Φ given by (56) we get the following simplified expression
for Φ′ :
                                                      a2          4
                                       Φ′ = −HΦ −        (ρ̄c vc + ρ̄r vr + h̄φ vφ ) .                            (58)
                                                      2k          3
  The energy density perturbation for the dark energy scalar field can be expressed in terms of δφ, φ and their
derivatives in the following way:
                                                   1  ′
                                                       φ (δφ)′ + a2 U,φ δφ + (φ′ )2 Φ .
                                                                                     
                                   δρφ ≡ ρφ δφ =     2
                                                                                                                  (59)
                                                   a
We recall that the latter expression, holding in the newtonian gauge, can be derived from δT 00(φ) of the dark energy
scalar field when comparing it to the usual one for a fluid of pressure pφ and energy density ρφ (or, equivalently,
directly perturbing (31)). Analogously, for the velocity perturbation in the newtonian gauge, one has
                                                              k ′
                                                    hφ vφ =      φ δφ ,                                           (60)
                                                              a2
which can be derived from the δT 0j(φ) component of the perturbed stress energy tensor. Making use of the two latter
expressions, Φ and Φ′ can be rewritten as

                          φ (δφ)′ + 3Hφ′ δφ + a2 U,φ δφ + 3H2 [Ωc (δc + 3λvc ) + Ωr (δr + 4λvr )]
                          ′                                                                      
                    Φ=                                                                              .           (61)
                                                       2k 2 − (φ′ )2


                                                             H2
                                                                             
                                          1 ′                           4
                                 Φ′ = −       φ δφ + 2HΦ + 3     Ωc vc + Ωr vr    .                               (62)
                                          2                  k          3

Note also that due to the definition of the energy density and pressure of the quintessence scalar field (31, 32) the
perturbed pressure appearing in eq.(52) is simply equal to:

                                                δpφ = δρφ − 2Uφ (φ)δφ .                                           (63)

As regard to the dark energy scalar field perturbation, δφ can be either written using (59) or it can be gained when
solving the perturbed Klein Gordon equation:

                    δφ′′ + 2Hδφ′ + (k 2 + a2 U,φφ )δφ + 4φ̄′ Φ′ − 2a2 U,φ Φ = 3H2 Ωc Cc [δc − 2Φ]   .             (64)
                                                                                                                            11

                                                    2




                                          δc / a
                                                   1.8



                                                   1.6



                                                   1.4



                                                   1.2



                                                    1

                                                                                            2        3
                                                         1              10             10       10
                                                                              1+ z



FIG. 3: Growth factor as a function of redshift for coupled dark energy and extended quintessence with a non minimal coupling
(for positive and negative couplings). The case of LCDM is also shown for reference. The value of ξ corresponds to ωJ BD0 ∼ 30.



   In fig.(3) the density perturbation of CDM devided by the scale parameter and normalized to one today is shown; the
latter quantity is the cosmological growth factor for CDM. The curves have been obtained by numerical integration
and correspond to the case of CQ (dotted) as well as EQ case, for a positive (long dashed) or negative (dashed)
coupling, as we will expose in detail in the following. The ΛCDM case is also shown for reference (solid): as it is well
known, in the latter scenario the growth factor is almost constant during the Matter Dominated Era (MDE, δc ∝ a),
while it increases going back in time due to the presence of radiation. The cosmological parameters of these scenarios
are as defined in the previous section. We postpone further comments to this figure to the end of this section, when
we expose the EQ case, too.


                                                         B.     Extended quintessence

  CDM variables follow the usual uncoupled equations, written here in newtonian gauge:

                                                                δc′ = −kvc − 3Φ′ ,                                        (65)

                                                                vc′ = −Hvc + kΨ .                                         (66)

Note that, in contrast with the CQ case, as we will see later, in EQ the two gravitational potentials Φ and Ψ are not
equal in module, since the anisotropic stress is in general different from zero. As we show now, however, this is not
the major source of difference between the two scenarios.
As shown in [33, 36] the perturbed Einstein equations can still be written formally as

                                                                   δGµν = κδTνµ ,                                         (67)

where Gµν is the usual Einstein tensor and δTνµ is the total stress energy tensor, summing up all species:

                                                             δTνµ = δTνµ (f ) + δTνµ (φ) .                                (68)

In particular the conserved stress energy tensor for φ is given by

                                     δTνµ (φ) = δTνµ mc [φ] + δTνµ nmc [φ] + δTνµ grav [φ] ,                              (69)

where, in the newtonian gauge:
                                                                  1  ′2          
                                         δTνµ mc [φ] =               Ψφ  − φ′
                                                                              δφ′
                                                                                    − U,φ δφ                              (70)
                                                                  a2
                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                  2     
                                        3H           Φ′         3H ′ F,φ R          k    R
                     δTνµ nmc [φ] = −         2Ψ −        F ′
                                                              +    δF  +     δφ +      −     δF ,                 (71)
                                        a2           H          a2         2        a2   2

                                                          3H2
                                                                          
                                                                      1
                                         δTνµ grav [φ] = 2 δF +         − F δGµν .                                (72)
                                                           a          κ
Carrying the last term of expression (72) to the left hand side in the perturbed Einstein equations, we can rewrite
eqs(67) as
                                                                      3H2
                              F δGµν = δTνµ mc [φ] + δTνµ nmc [φ] +       δF + δTνµ (f luid) .                    (73)
                                                                       a2
The (0, 0) component of (73) reads
                               2k 2
                                          
                                       1 6H                     3
                                    Φ=         (HF + F ′ ) Ψ − 2 (2HF + F ′ ) Φ′ +                                (74)
                                a2     F a2                    a
                                                                          
                                        1    ′  ′   ′2       2        F,φ R
                                      + 2 φ δφ − φ Ψ + a U,φ −                δφ+
                                       a                                2
                                                                             
                                                                 R
                                     −3HδF ′ − k 2 + 3H2 − a2       δF + ρf δf .
                                                                 2
  The (0, j) component of (73) gives the following equations:
                                                                             a2 0
                             [2HF + F ′ ] Ψ − 2F Φ′ = φ′ δφ + δF ′ − HδF +       δT       .                     (75)
                                                                              k j f luid
Combining the two previous equations to get rid of Φ′ , we get the Poisson equation in EQ cosmologies, which is
                                                              "                      !
                                                                                  ′2
                                                 2k 2       1     1       2   3 F
                                                      Φ=        − 2 φ′ +               Ψ+                       (76)
                                                  a2        F     a           2 F
                                                          
                                            1            F′                     3 F′ ′
                                        + 2 3 H+              φ′ δφ + φ′ δφ′ +       δF +
                                           a             2F                     2F
                                        a2 R 3H F ′
                                                                                
                                                                            F,φ R
                        − k 2 + 6H2 −         +           δF + a2 U,φ −              δφ +
                                          2      2 F                          2
                                                                                      
                                                                    3        F′
                                                         +ρf δf +      H+          hf vf ,
                                                                    k        2F
where we have used that in the Newtonian gauge δTj0 f luid = vf hf . Finally, the Klein Gordon equation which describes
the evolution of the EQ scalar field is
                                                          a2
                                                                              
                                   δφ′′ + 2Hδφ′ + k 2 −      (F,φφ R − 2U,φφ ) δφ =                                (77)
                                                          2
                                                   a2                       a2
                                = φ′ (Ψ′ − 3Φ′ ) +    (F,φ R − 4U,φ ) Ψ + F,φ δR ,
                                                    2                       2

where
                           2 h              ′
                                                                                                i
                   δR = − 2 (3HΨ − 3Φ′ ) + 3H (3HΨ − 3Φ′ ) − k 2 − 3H′ + 3H2 Ψ − 2k 2 Φ .
                                                                                     
                                                                                                                 (78)
                           a
These equations hold in general for any choice of the function F (φ). In order to solve the equations numerically, we
again set the case of non-minimal coupling, in which (16) is valid.

   The results of the numerical integration are shown in fig.(3). As a reference, we normalize the growthfactor to a
common value at present time. In the CQ case, the coupling to CDM has the effect of lowering the growthfactor
with respect to the ΛCDM case; this means that for a fixed primordial normalization of the perturbations, the CQ
structure formation is enhanced with respect to a ΛCDM case, independently on the sign of the coupling constant,
as it is known from earlier works [3]. The EQ phenomenology is completely different, as the structure formation
may be slower than the ΛCDM case, depending on the sign and magnitude of the coupling constant. This may have
interesting consequences for constraining these theories from the observations of cosmological structures in the mildly
and full non-linear regimes, as we see in the next section. Note that, consistently with the analysis of the previous
section, in the EQ case the departure from the ΛCDM case is again bigger for a negative coupling.
                                                                                                                      13

                                                   V.      NEWTONIAN LIMIT

   A coupling between dark energy and matter or gravity could indeed have observable effects on structure forma-
tion, due either to the interaction between species which behave differently with respect to gravity or because of a
modification of gravity itself. We perform here a derivation of the Newtonian limit for cosmological perturbations in
CQ and EQ scenarios [3, 30, 35]. This part of the work represents the interface to numerical simulations of structure
formation in these scenarios. Previous works on this subject considered the cases of CQ only [3, 13]. We do expect
to be able to track the differences outlined in the previous sections also in the present context.


                                                     A.    Coupled dark energy

   We strictly follow the notation of [3, 13] and we specialize the previous general equations to the case in which
λ ≡ H/k ≪ 1. This choice corresponds to the Newtonian limit, that is to say scales much smaller than the horizon.
When the newtonian limit holds, the expressions of both the gravitational potential Φ and its derivative Φ′ can be
largely simplified and become approximately equal to:
                                             1  ′
                                                 φ (δφ)′ + 3Hφ′ δφ + a2 U,φ δφ + 3Ωc H2 δc ,
                                                                                          
                                     Φ=        2
                                                                                                                    (79)
                                            2k

                                                                1
                                                          Φ′ = − φ′ δφ − HΦ .                                       (80)
                                                                2
Substituting Φ′ in the perturbed Klein Gordon equation (64), we get the following equation describing the evolution
of φ:
                δφ′′ + 2Hδφ′ + (k 2 + a2 U,φφ − 2φ′2 )δφ + Φ(−4Hφ′ − 2a2 U,φ + 6H2 Ωc Cc ) = 3H2 Ωc Cc δc .         (81)
In the Newtonian limit k ≫ H and the latter equation can be further simplified: the term containing Φ can be
neglected since Φ is order k −2 ; within the terms multiplying δφ , we neglect the contribution of the potential, which
has effect only at very recent times, when the acceleration takes over; furthermore, the remaining piece k 2 − 2φ′2 can
be rewritten as k 2 (1 − 2λ2 (dφ/dα)2 ) ∼ k 2 where α ≡ log a. Supposing that also δφ′′ and δφ′ can be neglected (this
can be further checked a posteriori), eq.(81) in the newtonian limit reduces to:
                                                           δφ ∼ 3λ2 Ωc Cc δc ,                                      (82)
stating that δφ is of order λ2 and can therefore be neglected, together with its derivative, in eq.(79) with respect to
the last term:
                                                                  3 2
                                                            Φ∼      λ Ωc δ c .                                      (83)
                                                                  2
By looking at the right hand side of eq.(50) we can formally define the quantity:
                                                           Φc ≡ Φ + Cc δφ ,                                         (84)
which reads
                                                             3 2
                                                     Φc =      λ Ωc δc (1 + 2Cc2 ) ,                                (85)
                                                             2
where we have used the approximated expression (82) for δφ obtained by solving the KG equation in the newtonian
limit. The latter equation reads in real space as
                                                                 a2
                                                    ∇2 Φc = −       ρc δc (1 + 2Cc2 ) ,                             (86)
                                                                 2
and if we explicit the units contained in ρ 2 we then have that Φc behaves like a new gravitational potential satisfying:
                                                      ∇2 Φc = −4πG∗ a2 ρc δc ,                                      (87)



2 Recall that our energy densities are equal to ρ̂ = 8πGρ and we have redefined ρ̂ = ρ for simplicity.
                                                                                                                     14

where we have defined G∗ as

                                                  G∗ ≡ G(1 + 2Cc2 ) .                                              (88)

In this way, we formally recover the usual Poisson equation, where the effect of the coupling is partially included in
the redefinition of the gravitational potential Φc and partially in a varying gravitational constant G∗ .
   The equations for the CDM component (55 and 50) can also be analogously simplified and read, in the Newtonian
limit, as:

                                                        δc ′ = −kvc ,                                              (89)


                                             vc′ + (H − Cc φ̄′ )vc = −kΦc .                                        (90)

Deriving the first equation and combining it with the second, it is straightforward to obtain
                                                            3
                                    δc′′ + (H − Cc φ′ )δc′ − H2 Ωc δc (1 + 2Cc2 ) = 0 .                            (91)
                                                            2
Furthermore, equation (90) allows us to clarify how the Euler equation, relevant for the interaction of dark matter
particles within structure formation, changes due to the presence of a coupling between dark matter and dark energy
(Einstein frame). Taking into account expression (84) and rewriting (90) in real space coordinates, the equation finally
reads as a modified Euler equation:
                                                          3
                                  ∇vc′ + (H − Cc φ′ )∇vc + H2 Ωc δc (1 + 2Cc2 ) = 0 .                              (92)
                                                          2
Supposing now that CDM is concentrated in one particle of mass mc at a distance r from a particle of mass Mc at
the origin we can rewrite the cold dark matter density contribution as

                                                      8πGMc e−Cc (φ−φ0 ) δ(0)
                                           Ωc δ c =                           ,                                    (93)
                                                             3H2 a
where we have used the fact that a non-relativistic particle at position r has a density given by mc nδ(r) (where δ(r)
stands for the Dirac distribution) with number density n = e−Cc (φ−φ0 ) given by equation (34) and we have assumed
that the density of the Mc mass particle is much larger than ρc . The Euler equation in cosmic time dt = adτ then
reads:

                                                                 4π G̃Mc δ(0)
                                           ∇v˙c = −H̃∇vc −                    ,                                    (94)
                                                                      a2
where we included the mass scaling in a new redefinition of the gravitational constant

                                    G̃ = G∗ e−Cc (φ−φ0 ) = G(1 + 2Cc2 )e−Cc (φ−φ0 ) ,                              (95)

and the further effect of the coupling on the friction term is a redefinition of the Hubble constant:
                                                                     !
                                                                  φ̇
                                                 H̃ = H 1 − Cc          .                                          (96)
                                                                  H

Though the choice of including the exponential correction in a redefinition of the gravitational constant might be
convenient for numerical purposes, we can as well rewrite eq.(94) as:

                                                                4πG∗ M̃c δ(0)
                                           ∇v˙c = −H̃∇vc −                    ,                                    (97)
                                                                    a2
in which gravity is still governed by a gravitational (though modified) constant and the time dependent extra con-
tribution is included in the mass M̃c ≡ Mc e−Cc (φ−φ0 ) of dark matter: when dark matter particles interact with each
other, each dark matter particle sees the other one as possessing a ‘modified’ mass which takes into account the
non-standard scenario due to the coupling.
 Along the attractor (36), the full correction to the gravitational constant and to the expansion assume the following
                                                                                                                           15

                                                 1.14




                                        G / G*
                                        ~
                                                 1.12

                                                  1.1

                                                 1.08

                                                 1.06

                                                 1.04

                                                 1.02

                                                   1

                                                 0.98

                                                 0.96
                                                         0        2      4               6       8   10
                                                                             z



FIG. 4: Gravitational correction as a function of redshift for CQ and EQ models. The value of ξ corresponds to ωJ BD0 ∼ 30.



expressions:
                                                                                             2
                                                             G̃ = G(1 + 2Cc2 )a−2Cc ,                                    (98)


                                                               H̃ = H 1 − 2Cc2
                                                                                     
                                                                                             ,                           (99)

                                                                                 2
                                                                 M̃ = Mc a−2Cc .                                        (100)

This clearly shows how the corrections behave regardless of the sign of the coupling constant. At the end of this
Section, we’ll focus on this aspect again, comparing the corrections to the strength of gravity in CQ and EQ.


                                                        B.     Extended quintessence

  In the limit of small scales, in which k ≫ H we can proceed in simplifying the equations for EQ in a way which is
analogous to the one adopted in CQ. Neglecting time derivatives (negligible in the newtonian limit with respect to
spatial derivatives) and the potential, the Poisson equation (76) reduces to:

                                                        2k 2         k2
                                                             F Φ = −    F,φ δφ + ρf δf ,                                (101)
                                                         a2          a2
which reads, in real space, as:
                                                                                     F,φ 2
                                                 F ∇2 Φ = −4πGa2 ρf δf −                ∇ δφ .                          (102)
                                                                                      2
From the traceless part of the perturbed Einstein equations (component (i,j)) we get the gravitational potential
relation
                                                                             δF
                                                               (Ψ + Φ) = −      ,                                       (103)
                                                                             F
so that in general the right hand side, representing the anisotropic stress, is different from zero in scalar tensor theories.
Equation (102) can then be equivalently written, in terms of Ψ, as
                                                                                     F,φ 2
                                                  F ∇2 Ψ = 4πGa2 ρf δf −                ∇ δφ .                          (104)
                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                  16

In the approximation we are considering, the perturbed Klein Gordon equation given by (77) only receives contribution
from

                                                   δφ = F,φ [Ψ + 2Φ] .                                         (105)

Substituting (103), we obtain:
                                                    F F,φ         F F,φ
                                          δφ =              Φ=−            Ψ.                                  (106)
                                                  F + F,φ 2     F + 2F,φ 2

Further substituting in (101), the Poisson equation can be rewritten in the usual way

                                                    2k 2     1
                                                         ΦE = ρf δ f ,                                         (107)
                                                     a2      F
or, in real space, as:
                                                               4πG 2
                                                  ∇2 ΦE = −       a ρf δ f ,                                   (108)
                                                                F
if we redefine the gravitational potential as
                                                                          !
                                                                  2
                                                            1 F,φ
                                                 ΦE =    1+                   Φ.                               (109)
                                                            2 F + F,φ 2

Note that we could have equivalently substitute δφ(Ψ) in (104) thus obtaining
                                                               4πG 2
                                                  ∇2 ΨE =         a ρf δ f ,                                   (110)
                                                                F
if we redefine the gravitational potential as:
                                                                             !
                                                                   2
                                                            1    F,φ
                                                ΨE =     1−                      Ψ.                            (111)
                                                            2 F + 2F,φ 2

The Euler equation (66) is then modified according to:
                                                                             !
                                                                     2
                                                                   F,φ
                                         vc′ + Hvc + k     1+                    Φ=0.                          (112)
                                                                 F + F,φ 2

Substituting the expression for Φ(ΦE ) given by (109) and making use of the Poisson equation (107) we get
                                                                            2
                                                        a2         2(F + 2F,φ )
                                        vc′ + Hvc +        ρf δ f            2   =0,                           (113)
                                                        2k        F (2F + 3F,φ )

which in real space reads as:
                                                                        2
                                                    3          2(F + 2F,φ )
                                     ∇v ′ c + H∇vc + H2 Ωf δf            2   =0,                               (114)
                                                    2         F (2F + 3F,φ )

where we have defined Ωf ≡ ρf /ρcrit and ρcrit ≡ 3H2 F/a2 . For comparison with the CQ case investigated in the
previous paragraph, suppose now that the only other fluid present is CDM, concentrated in one particle of mass mc
at a distance r from a particle of mass Mc at the origin, such that
                                                               1 Mc δ(0)
                                                    Ωc δ c =             ,                                     (115)
                                                               F 3H2 a
due to the fact that in this framework cold dark matter is uncoupled from dark energy and approximately scales in
the usual way ρc ∝ a−3 . Substituting the latter expression in (114) we get

                                                               4π G̃Mc δ(0)
                                           ∇v̇c + H∇vc +                    =0,                                (116)
                                                                    a2
                                                                                                                      17

in terms of the cosmic time, where we have included the extra contribution in the redefinition of the gravitational
constant, which is now varying in time:
                                                                 2
                                                        2(F + 2F,φ ) 1
                                                 G̃ =            2       .                                         (117)
                                                        (2F + 3F,φ ) 8πF

The latter formalism is general for any choice of F (φ). For illustration we specify our final results to the non minimal
coupling choice given by (16). In this case
                                           h                      i
                                               1                2
                                             8πG∗ + (1 + 8ξ)ξφ            1
                                      G̃ = h                      i h            i .                                (118)
                                               1                2      1       2
                                             8πG∗ + (1 + 6ξ)ξφ        G∗ + 8πξφ


For small values of the coupling, that is to say ξ ≪ 1 the latter expression becomes:

                                                   G̃
                                                      ∼ 1 − 8πG∗ ξφ2                                               (119)
                                                   G∗
which manifestely depends on the sign of the coupling ξ. In fig.(4) we compare the behavior of the correction to
the gravitational constant in CQ and EQ theories, for different values and sign of the coupling constants. As we
stressed in this Section, in the CQ case the correction is independent on the sign of the coupling constant, just as
expected since the theory corresponds to the case of induced gravity, which, as discussed in the first section, forces
the sign dependence in order to mantain gravity as an attractive force; note also how also at present the value of the
gravitational coupling is larger than the corresponding ΛCDM case, as it is evident from (98). On the other hand, in
the EQ case, the sign has the effect of increasing or decreasing the gravitational strength.


                                            C.    Recipe for Nbody users

   We conclude this section by summarizing the quantities needed as an input for N-body simulations when considering
CQ models or EQ models as discussed in this paper. An N-body code which wants to take into account the modified
gravitational strength between different species, as well as the modified perturbation growth rate, needs to read tables
with the modification listed in table I for both sets of cosmologies. The expansion history, represented by the Hubble
expansion rate, needs also to be modified, although it is not listed in the table.
Three typologies of corrections are considered: the gravitational interaction between dark matter (DM) particles, the
friction term due to a modified expansion and the mass of the interacting species.
When dealing with CQ models, all three corrections are active: the gravitational interaction between DM-DM particles
changes, the friction term provides an extra contribution due to the coupling and the mass of the DM particles also
changes with time and depending of the coupling. In the case in which we also consider baryons (B), non coupled to
the scalar field φ or to CDM, the gravitational interaction between DM-B or B-B is the usual Newtonian one, since
non coupled baryons satisfy the standard Euler equation. Furthermore, no correction to the baryon mass is required.
On the contrary, when EQ cosmologies are considered, only the gravitational correction needs to be applied. The
effect of the coupling is all included in an effective gravitational ‘constant’, which changes with time according to
eq.(118) for all the species considered. Both the friction term and the mass term remain unaltered.


                                                 VI.    CONCLUSIONS

  In this paper we performed a comparative analysis of the theoretical framework and phenomenology of cosmological
perturbations in two of the main scenarios where the dark energy is explicitely coupled with dark matter (Coupled
Quintessence, CQ) or gravity (Extended Quintessence, EQ). Weyl scaling the two theories, we fixed the expressions of
the two scenarios in the Jordan and Einstein frames. This showed how they lead to markedly different phenomenolo-
gies, even if in the Jordan frame, they differ only by a constant term into the function multiplying the Ricci scalar:
while the CQ case is bounded to produce effective corrections to gravity which increase its strength, the EQ case is
able to provide corrections in both senses. This has important consequences which we highlight in the rest of the
paper.
We show that indeed linear perturbation growth may actually accelerate or slow down in EQ cases with respect to a
case in which the dark energy is uncoupled, while in CQ scenarios perturbations can be enhanced only. In order to set
                                                                                                                      18

                            Correction type              CQ                    EQ
                            Gravity (∆G/G∗ ) DM-DM       1 + 2Cc2              G̃/G∗
                                                B-DM     1                     G̃/G∗
                                                B-B      1                     G̃/G∗
                                                                 ′
                            Friction (∆H/H)              1 − CH
                                                              cφ
                                                                               1
                            Mass     (∆m/m)     DM       e−Cc (φ−φ0 )          1
                                                B        1                     1


              TABLE I: Summary of corrections required to run N-body simulations in CQ and EQ scenarios.


up a suitable framework for the realization of N-body simulations in these cosmologies, we derive the Newtonian limit
for both, again highlighting the different behavior that the gravitational corrections possess, never neglecting the role
of Quintessence fluctuations. Finally, we list the quantities which need to be modified in N-body codes for taking into
account the corrections to the expansion, strength of gravity as perceived by different species, as well as the modified
perturbation growth rate, in body scenarios, when performing simulations of non-linear structure formation.
Our work opens up the possibility of measuring the effect of non-minimal dark energy models in numerical simulations
of structure formation, thus being able to constrain them through observations. N-body simulations nowadays reach
the extension of thousands of Mpc, where indeed the interplay between large and small scale behavior of gravity really
matters. Possible deviations from the ordinary behavior of gravity in General Relativity, which might be consistent
with non-minimal dark energy models have to be detected coherently on all scales in order to provide convincing
evidence. This capability can be built only by understanding properties and differences between the ways in which
such deviations could manifest, developing capabilities for simulating and detecting them in large scale numerical
simulations of structure formation and finally constraining them through observations. This work completes the first
step in this path.


                                                    Acknowledgments

  We are grateful to F. Perrotta and J. Macher for helpful collaboration. We thank E.Linder, K.Dolag, L.Moscardini,
M.Bartelmann, S.Matarrese, M.Meneghetti, C.Wetterich, G.Robbers for useful discussions. This work was supported
by Progetto D4 Regione Friuli Venezia Giulia. VP is supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.


                                                      References




 [1] L. Amendola, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 043511 [arXiv:astro-ph/9908023].
 [2] S. Matarrese, M. Pietroni and C. Schimd, JCAP 0308 (2003) 005 [arXiv:astro-ph/0305224].
 [3] L. Amendola, Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 103524 [arXiv:astro-ph/0311175].
 [4] S. Lee, G. C. Liu and K. W. Ng, Phys. Rev. D 73 (2006) 083516 [arXiv:astro-ph/0601333].
 [5] B. Wang, J. Zang, C. Y. Lin, E. Abdalla and S. Micheletti, Nucl. Phys. B 778 (2007) 69 [arXiv:astro-ph/0607126].
 [6] R. Mainini and S. Bonometto, arXiv:0709.0174 [astro-ph].
 [7] L. Amendola, M. Gasperini and F. Piazza, arXiv:astro-ph/0407573.
 [8] L. Amendola, G. Camargo Campos and R. Rosenfeld, arXiv:astro-ph/0610806.
 [9] Z. K. Guo, N. Ohta and S. Tsujikawa, Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007) 023508 [arXiv:astro-ph/0702015].
[10] R. Mainini and S. Bonometto, JCAP 0706 (2007) 020 [arXiv:astro-ph/0703303].
[11] E. Abdalla, L. R. W. Abramo, L. Sodre and B. Wang, arXiv:0710.1198 [astro-ph].
[12] O. Bertolami, F. G. Pedro and M. L. Delliou, arXiv:0705.3118 [astro-ph].
[13] A. V. Maccio, C. Quercellini, R. Mainini, L. Amendola and S. A. Bonometto, Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 123516
     [arXiv:astro-ph/0309671].
[14] A. W. Brookfield, C. van de Bruck and L. M. H. Hall, arXiv:0709.2297 [astro-ph].
[15] G. Mangano, G. Miele and V. Pettorino, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 18 (2003) 831 [arXiv:astro-ph/0212518].
                                                                                                                            19

[16] T. Koivisto, Phys. Rev. D 72 (2005) 043516 [arXiv:astro-ph/0504571].
[17] M. Quartin, M. O. Calvao, S. E. Joras, R. R. R. Reis and I. Waga, arXiv:0802.0546 [astro-ph].
[18] G. Olivares, F. Atrio-Brandela and D. Pavon, arXiv:0801.4517 [astro-ph].
[19] C. G. Boehmer, G. Caldera-Cabral, R. Lazkoz and R. Maartens, arXiv:0801.1565 [gr-qc].
[20] R. Fardon, A. E. Nelson and N. Weiner, JCAP 0410 (2004) 005 [arXiv:astro-ph/0309800].
[21] A. W. Brookfield, C. van de Bruck, D. F. Mota and D. Tocchini-Valentini, Phys. Rev. D 73 (2006) 083515
     [arXiv:astro-ph/0512367].
[22] L. Amendola, M. Baldi and C. Wetterich, arXiv:0706.3064 [astro-ph].
[23] C. Wetterich, Phys. Lett. B 655 (2007) 201 [arXiv:0706.4427 [hep-ph]].
[24] D. F. Mota, V. Pettorino, G. Robbers and C. Wetterich, Phys. Lett. B 663 (2008) 160 arXiv:0802.1515 [astro-ph].
[25] R. Bean, E. E. Flanagan and M. Trodden, arXiv:0709.1128 [astro-ph].
[26] N. Afshordi, M. Zaldarriaga and K. Kohri, Phys. Rev. D 72 (2005) 065024 [arXiv:astro-ph/0506663].
[27] O. E. Bjaelde, A. W. Brookfield, C. van de Bruck, S. Hannestad, D. F. Mota, L. Schrempp and D. Tocchini-Valentini,
     JCAP 0801 (2008) 026 arXiv:0705.2018 [astro-ph].
[28] J. C. Hwang, Class. Quant. Grav. 7, 1613 (1990).
[29] J. C. Hwang, Phys. Rev. D 42 (1990) 2601.
[30] C. Schimd, J. P. Uzan and A. Riazuelo, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 083512 [arXiv:astro-ph/0412120].
[31] A. Riazuelo and J. P. Uzan, Phys. Rev. D 66 (2002) 023525 [arXiv:astro-ph/0107386].
[32] J. P. Uzan, Phys. Rev. D 59 (1999) 123510 [arXiv:gr-qc/9903004].
[33] V. Faraoni, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 023504 [arXiv:gr-qc/0002091].
[34] F. Perrotta, C. Baccigalupi and S. Matarrese, Phys. Rev. D 61, 023507 (2000)
[35] B. Boisseau, G. Esposito-Farese, D. Polarski and A. A. Starobinsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 2236 [arXiv:gr-qc/0001066].
[36] F. Perrotta and C. Baccigalupi, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2002) 123505 [arXiv:astro-ph/0201335].
[37] S. Matarrese, C. Baccigalupi and F. Perrotta, Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 061301 [arXiv:astro-ph/0403480].
[38] V. Pettorino, C. Baccigalupi and F. Perrotta, JCAP 0512 (2005) 003 [arXiv:astro-ph/0508586].
[39] V. Pettorino, C. Baccigalupi and G. Mangano, JCAP 0501 (2005) 014 [arXiv:astro-ph/0412334].
[40] F. Perrotta, S. Matarrese, M. Pietroni and C. Schimd, Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 084004 [arXiv:astro-ph/0310359].
[41] Wands D. 1994, Class. Quant. Grav. 11, 269 gr-qc/9307034
[42] Esposito-Farese G. Polarski D. 2001, Phys. Rev. D 63, 063504, gr-qc/0009034
[43] Wetterich C. 1988 Nucl. Phys. B 302, 645
[44] K. i. Maeda, Phys. Rev. D 39, 3159 (1989).
[45] R. Catena, M. Pietroni and L. Scarabello, Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007) 084039 [arXiv:astro-ph/0604492].
[46] Doran M. Jaeckel J. 2002, Phys. Rev. D 66 043519, astro-ph/0203018
[47] A. Zee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42 (1979) 417.
[48] D. J. Holden and D. Wands, Phys. Rev. D 61 (2000) 043506 [arXiv:gr-qc/9908026].
[49] Kodama H., Sasaki M. 1984, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 78, 1
[50] B. Ratra, P. J. E. Peebles 1988, Astrophys. J. 325, L17
[51] Brax P., Martin J. 2000, Phys. Rev. D 61 103502 astro-ph/9912046
[52] Zlatev I., Wang L., Steinhardt P.J. 1999, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 896 astro-ph/9807002
[53] D. N. Spergel et al. 2003, Astrophys. J. Supp. 148, 175 arXiv:astroph 0302209
[54] M. Tegmark et al. 2004, Phys. Rev. D 69 103501 arXiv:astroph 0310723
[55] A. G. Riess et al. 2004, arXiv:astroph 0402512
[56] D. N. Spergel et al., arXiv:astro-ph/0603449.
[57] J. J. Halliwell, Phys. Lett. B 185 (1987) 341.
[58] C. Wetterich, Astron. Astrophys. 301 (1995) 321 arXiv:hep-th/9408025.
[59] V. Faraoni, arXiv:gr-qc/0703044.
[60] Bertotti B., Iess L., Tortora P. 2003, Nature 425, 374
[61] V. Acquaviva, C. Baccigalupi, S. M. Leach, A. R. Liddle and F. Perrotta, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 104025
     [arXiv:astro-ph/0412052].
[62] T. Clifton, D. F. Mota and J. D. Barrow, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 358 (2005) 601 [arXiv:gr-qc/0406001].
[63] C. Baccigalupi, S. Matarrese and F. Perrotta, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 123510 [arXiv:astro-ph/0005543].
