                                               Prepared for submission to JCAP




                                               Cosmology with Persistent Homology: a
                                               Fisher Forecast

                                               Jacky H. T. Yip,a Matteo Biagetti,b,c,d Alex Cole,e,f,g Karthik
                                               Viswanathan,f,g and Gary Shiu.a
arXiv:2403.13985v2 [astro-ph.CO] 26 Aug 2024




                                               a Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA

                                               b AREA Science Park, Padriciano 99, 34149 Trieste, Italy

                                               c Institute for Fundamental Physics of the Universe, Via Beirut 2, 34151 Trieste, Italy

                                               d Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati, Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy

                                               e Gravitation Astroparticle Physics Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098

                                                XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands
                                               f Delta Institute for Theoretical Physics, Science Park 904, PO Box 94485, 1090 GL Amsterdam,

                                                The Netherlands
                                               g Institute of Physics, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, PO Box 94485, 1090 GL Ams-

                                                terdam, The Netherlands
                                                E-mail: hyip2@wisc.edu, matteo.biagetti@areasciencepark.it, acole1221@gmail.com,
                                                k.viswanathan@uva.nl, shiu@physics.wisc.edu

                                               Abstract. Persistent homology naturally addresses the multi-scale topological characteristics of
                                               the large-scale structure as a distribution of clusters, loops, and voids. We apply this tool to
                                               the dark matter halo catalogs from the Quijote simulations, and build a summary statistic for
                                               comparison with the joint power spectrum and bispectrum statistic regarding their information
                                               content on cosmological parameters and primordial non-Gaussianity. Through a Fisher analysis,
                                               we find that constraints from persistent homology are tighter for 8 out of the 10 parameters by
                                               margins of 13 − 50%. The complementarity of the two statistics breaks parameter degeneracies,
                                               allowing for a further gain in constraining power when combined. We run a series of consistency
                                               checks to consolidate our results, and conclude that our findings motivate incorporating persistent
                                               homology into inference pipelines for cosmological survey data.


                                               Keywords: cosmological parameters from LSS, cosmic web, cosmological simulations, physics of
                                               the early universe
Contents

1 Introduction                                                      2

2 Dataset                                                           4

3 From Dark Matter Halos to Persistence Diagrams                    6
  3.1   Coarse-graining                                             7
  3.2   Topology of simplicial complexes                            8
  3.3   Coarse-graining via filtration                              8
  3.4   Persistence diagrams and images                            13

4 From Persistence Diagrams to Summary Statistic                   13
  4.1   Description of the data vector                             14
  4.2   Covariance                                                 17

5 From Summary Statistic to Cosmological Constraints               18
  5.1   Constraints on cosmological parameters                     19
  5.2   Constraints on primordial non-Gaussianity                  22

6 Conclusions and Future Directions                                22

A Numerical Derivatives                                            25

B On Choice of Nbin and Fisher Analysis Consistency Checks         25

C Independent Information from Each Component of the Data Vector   28

D On Applicability to the Sancho Suite of Galaxy Catalogs          31

E Additional Plots                                                 32




                                            –1–
Figure 1: Topological data analysis of the large-scale structure. Cosmic structures natu-
rally correspond to topological features of various dimensions. Halo clusters (bottom right), filament
loops (top left), and cosmic voids (top right) are 0-, 1-, and 2-cycles in topology respectively.


1   Introduction

One of the ongoing challenges in modern precision cosmology is identifying and characterizing
statistical summaries to extract the maximum amount of information from late-time observables.
This task is complicated by the non-linearity of gravitational evolution, which takes initial fluctu-
ations close to Gaussian to highly non-Gaussian structures. Therefore, optimal summary statistics
are context-specific. Nevertheless, up to theoretical errors, methods of computing low-order cor-
relation functions at large scales from perturbation theory techniques do provide access to some
information. This approach has proven successful, particularly in the last few years, through the
systematic analysis of BOSS data using predictions of the redshift space galaxy power spectrum
and bispectrum up to one-loop order [1–10]. These studies demonstrated the constraining power of
galaxy surveys, providing competitive constraints as compared to those from the power spectrum
of temperature anisotropies of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) [11–13]. On the other
hand, these statistics do not exhaust the information regarding our universe’s initial conditions
and dynamics. Moreover, statistics defined in Fourier space obscure consequences of position space
locality, so that local perturbations to the data can have large effects. Most dramatically, some
local effects (e.g., galaxy bias) cannot be distinguished from non-local physics (e.g., primordial
non-Gaussianity) with these statistics (see [14] for a review and references therein, and [15, 16] for
a recent take on the topic).
   Given these issues and because of the steady progress in computational techniques, a plethora of
methods alternative to low-order correlation functions have been proposed in the last few years. A
promising approach is that of field-level inference, which performs Bayesian inference of the initial




                                                –2–
conditions, as well as cosmological parameters, directly on voxels of the cosmic field [17–29]. The
advantage of this approach is that it exploits, at least in principle, all the available information
in a given map. The difficulty in its implementation is that it requires sampling a very high-
dimensional parameter space: current generation survey volumes, such as Euclid and DESI, are
of the order of 10 (Gpc/h)3 and resolve scales down to a few Mpc/h. This implies sampling in
a space of 106 − 108 dimensions, or more. Recent advances in samplers based on microcanonical
Hamiltonian or Langevin Monte Carlo attempt to address this problem [28, 30, 31]. In a more
general context, parameter estimation based on directly simulating the observables is a rapidly
advancing field often referred to as simulation-based inference [32–37] (see [38] for a recent review
and [39–49] for cosmological applications).
   Instead of aiming at the full field-level information, one may construct by hand a suitable
summary statistic, such that it contains more information than low-order correlation functions and
retains a degree of physical interpretability of the observable. For inference, one can then build a
neural network to map the statistic to parameters. The drawback of this is that irrespective of the
neural network doing a perfect job, the summary itself is likely going to be, to a certain extent, a
sub-optimal compression.
    This approach can also be viewed as having a hard-coded layer for preprocessing the data before
it is fed into an inference model, ensuring that only worthy information, which respects aspects
such as symmetries, is used for inference. It is often desirable to use robust information against
certain unknown physics, in other words, to use “nuisance-hardened” information [50]. It was
advocated in [39] that in the context of cosmological inference, one performs a two-step compression
process where the data is first summarized into well-understood hand-crafted statistics, and a neural
network follows for inference, trained to extract maximum information from these summaries.
   Hence, in recent years, there has been a surge in exploring new interpretable summary statistics
that go beyond low-order correlations. Notable among these are marked fields [51–58], skew-spectra
[59–64], void statistics [65], one-point PDFs [66–71], nearest neighbor distributions [72–74], pair-
connectedness functions [75], and wavelet scattering transforms [76–78]—a list far from exhaustive.
   Along these lines, several of the present authors have proposed in [79] an approach based on
computational topology (see [80] for an inference pipeline, and [81, 82] for earlier applications to
the CMB and the string theory landscape). Namely, [79] constructed summary statistics from
persistent homology (see [83] for a review). The tool was used to quantify the large-scale structure
morphology, via discrete and biased tracers of the matter field, as a distribution of clusters, loops,
and voids across scales. Parametric tests were used to detect primordial non-Gaussianity of the local
type in distributions of dark matter halos from N-body simulations, and the topological summaries
were found to provide a level of sensitivity on par with the standard method of scale-dependent
bias in the tracer’s power spectrum. Furthermore, the topological signals were captured at mildly
non-linear length scales, complementary to the long-wavelength modes relevant to scale-dependent
bias. This indicates promising potential of the large-scale structure’s topology for alternative non-
Gaussianities. Of this sort, in [84], lower-dimensional summaries enabled the calculation of (the
inverse of) the covariance matrix and the Fisher information for the local and equilateral types of
primordial non-Gaussianity, also showing promising results. In parallel, similar methods have been
applied to matter fields [85] and weak lensing maps [86, 87] to derive parameter constraints.




                                                –3–
Figure 2: Flow of this paper. We explain the machinery of persistent homology and detail the
filtration designed for dark matter halos. The raw outputs of a persistent homology analysis are
persistence diagrams, which we summarize into a histogram-based statistic. Applying this pipeline
to the entire suite of halo catalogs, we compute the Fisher information matrix and report our
cosmological constraints, which are generally tighter in comparison with the joint power spectrum
and bispectrum statistic.


   One good aspect of taking this approach is that statistics derived from this tool are naturally
functions of distance, and may thus be recognized as syntheses of information from a range of high-
order correlators “filtered” through topology. This is evident when considering that each topological
feature originates from varying numbers of halos as vertices, which we will explain later. To this
end, persistent homology for cosmology deserves a more thorough analysis. In this work, we further
expand the power of the previous setups by varying the nearest-neighbor parameter k in the coarse-
graining scheme to emphasize topological features of different scales. Then we apply our pipeline
to the Quijote halo catalogs [88–90], and compute constraints via the Fisher information matrix
for 7 cosmological parameters and 3 primordial non-Gaussianity amplitudes.
   The flow of this paper is presented in Figure 2. Section 2 introduces the dataset, specifically the
dark matter halo catalogs from Quijote in redshift space. In Section 3, we review the essential
aspects of persistent homology, with a focus on the tailored coarse-graining scheme for halos. In
Section 4, we describe the building of our summary statistic from the outputs of a persistent
homology computation. The results of our Fisher analysis are presented in Section 5, where we
discuss them in comparison with conventional statistics of low-order correlation functions. Finally
in Section 6, we give our conclusions and outlook for future research directions.


2       Dataset

Our method of persistent homology is well-defined for any point cloud, such as positions of dark
matter halos or galaxies. In this work, we apply our pipeline to dark matter halos. The halo
catalogs at redshift z = 0.5 in real space are taken from the Quijote and Quijote-PNG suites
[88, 89] (hereafter collectively referred to as Quijote). The choice of z = 0.5 is relatable to
galaxies observed in surveys such as the BOSS CMASS sample [91, 92].1 The Quijote N-body
    1
    We have tried with considerable efforts to use the Sancho mock galaxy dataset, previously used in [93], which is
modeled to mock CMASS galaxies. However, we found that key assumptions necessary for the Fisher analysis break
down for this dataset. See Appendix D for details.




                                                       –4–
simulations are run with GADGET-III, each having 5123 dark matter particles in a 1 (Gpc/h)3 box,
and the halo catalogs are generated from snapshots with the friends-of-friends algorithm. We use
halos that are composed of at least 50 particles, which corresponds to a minimum halo mass of
Mmin = 3.28 × 1013 M⊙ and an average halo number density of n̄ ≈ 9.88 × 10−5 (h/Mpc)3 at the
fiducial cosmology.
   The halo catalogs, originally available in real space, are converted to catalogs in redshift space
using the distant-observer approximation. We apply
                                                             v · n̂
                                               x→x+                 n̂                                            (2.1)
                                                           a(z)H(z)

to each halo position x, where v is the halo’s peculiar velocity, n̂pis the line-of-sight, a(z) =
(1 + z)−1 is the scale factor, and the Hubble parameter H(z) = 100 Ωm a−3 + (1 − Ωm )a−3(1+w)
in (km/s)(h/Mpc) depends on the specific cosmology of the catalog. We process each catalog
along each of the three axes (z-axis only for the fiducial catalogs), following [94]. Hence, there are
effectively (500 N-body) × (3 RSD axes) = 1500 realizations for each non-fiducial cosmology and
145002 realizations for the fiducial cosmology (Table 1).3
   The fiducial cosmological parameters4 are Ωm = 0.3175, Ωb = 0.049, h = 0.6711, ns = 0.9624,
            P
σ8 = 0.834,    mν = 0.0 eV, and w = −1. In the non-fiducial cosmologies5 , these values are varied
by a step ∆θ above and below:

                 {∆Ωm , ∆Ωb , ∆h, ∆ns , ∆σ8 , ∆w} = {0.01, 0.002, 0.02, 0.02, 0.015, 0.05}.
                                          P
As for the total mass of neutrinos,           mν , there are three non-fiducial values of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4 eV.
   The realizations from Quijote-PNG have initial conditions with different shapes of primordial
non-Gaussianity: local [95], equilateral [96], and orthogonal-LSS [97] (these shapes are special cases
of the bispectrum for general single field inflation computed in [98]). The steps for them are all
∆fNL = 100.

Power spectrum and bispectrum measurements. We measure the halo auto power spectrum
monopole and quadrupole (Pℓ=0 and Pℓ=2 ), and the bispectrum monopole (Bℓ=0 ), using the public
code PBI4 [99]. The code uses a fourth-order density interpolation and interlacing scheme as
described in [100]. Bins have a width of ∆k = 2kf , where kf = 0.006 h/Mpc is the fundamental
frequency of the 1 (Gpc/h)3 box, and measurements are taken up to kmax = 0.3 h/Mpc, beyond
which the shot-noise, assumed to be Poissonian6 , strongly dominates7 . This results in 24 bins in each
   2
      We skip the first 500 of the 15000 fiducial simulations available in Quijote as they share the same initial random
seeds with the non-fiducial simulations. This ensures that the covariance and derivative estimations are completely
independent.
    3
      Hereafter we use the terms “catalog”, “simulation”, and “realization” interchangeably; they all refer to a simu-
lated set of halo positions in redshift space.
    4                                P
      The total mass of neutrinos      mν and the dark energy equation of state parameter w are nominally included
in what we refer to as the set of cosmological parameters.
    5
      Contrary to Quijote, we define the w+ cosmology as the one with the less negative w value.
    6
      While this is a standard assumption, the actual shot-noise might tend to be sub-Poissonian as the halos used in
this work fall into the higher-mass end. The authors thank the Referee for pointing this out.
    7
      The signal-to-noise ratio drops below 0.5 beyond kmax = 0.3 h/Mpc for P0 .




                                                        –5–
      N-body suite            Cosmology            Varying parameter value      Number of realizations
                                 Fiducial                      -                         14500
                                   Ω+m                      0.3275                       1500
                                   Ω−m                      0.3075                       1500
                                   Ω+b                       0.051                       1500
                                   Ω−b                       0.047                       1500
                                   h+                       0.6911                       1500
                                   h−                       0.6511                       1500
                                   n+s                      0.9824                       1500
         Quijote                   n−s                      0.9424                       1500
                                   σ8+                       0.849                       1500
                                   σ−                        0.819                       1500
                               P 8
                              ( mν )+++                       0.4                        1500
                               ( mν )++
                                P
                                                              0.2                        1500
                                ( mν )+
                                 P
                                                              0.1                        1500
                         Fiducial (Zeldovich IC)               -                         1500
                                   w+                       −0.95                        1500
                                   w−                       −1.05                        1500
                                 local+
                                fNL                           100                        1500
                                 local−
                                fNL                          −100                        1500
                                 equil+
                                fNL                           100                        1500
      Quijote-PNG                equil−
                                fNL                          −100                        1500
                                 ortho+
                                fNL                           100                        1500
                                 ortho−
                                fNL                          −100                        1500
                                                             Total                       47500

                         Table 1: Organization of all realizations used.


of P0 and P2 , and 1522 triangles for B0 . We subtract shot-noise from the monopole measurements,
except for the fiducial measurements which are used for estimating the covariance. The Poisson
shot-noise terms are 1/n̄ for P0 and n̄12 + P0 (k1 )+P0 (k
                                                        n̄
                                                           2 )+P0 (k3 )
                                                                        for B0 (k1 , k2 , k3 ). Since the focus
of this work is not on these conventional low-order correlation statistics, we do not show further
details about these measurements; the reader may refer to [90, 94].


3   From Dark Matter Halos to Persistence Diagrams

At large scales, dark matter is organized in a cosmic web of clusters, filaments, and voids of
different sizes and shapes [101]. The goal of our method is to characterize these cosmic structures
by applying persistent homology to dark matter halo positions, then quantify the information
content on parameters of the ΛCDM cosmological model and primordial non-Gaussianity.
    The main concepts of a persistent homology computation can be summarized in simple words as
follows. From a point cloud of halos, we build a series of simplicial complexes by adding simplices
one after another according to their length scale. Each topological feature, as a “hole” in the series
of complexes, only exists and “persists” over a continuous range of scales, since the simplices that
assemble or destroy the feature have not been added at the two scales that define this range. We
then collect this data from all topological features and construct a statistical summary informative
for cosmology.
   In this section, after reviewing basic topology, we explain the process described above in detail,
in particular how diagrams of topological features are built from a halo catalog. While in this




                                                    –6–
Figure 3: Life of a topological feature. The blue point cloud represents projected redshift
space positions of halos in a 300 × 300 × 100 (Mpc/h)3 subbox within a fiducial realization. We
illustrate the “life” of an underdensity (enclosed by the red boundary) as a topological feature in
the evolving simplicial complex as the filtration parameter ν grows (analogously the coarse-graining
scale). Left: At a small scale, the simplicial complex contains none of the simplices that mark out
the underdensity. Middle: At an intermediate scale, all the relevant edges have just been added.
Born as a “hole” in the complex, the underdensity can be associated to a topological feature, a
member of a homology class of 1-cycles. Right: At a later stage, the hole is completely filled with
triangular faces—the feature has died.


paper we work with simulated halos in a cubic box that might not be observationally realistic, we
emphasize that our pipeline is also well-defined for actual data, e.g., galaxies in a lightcone with
a given survey geometry and window function. Nevertheless, this work is a proof of concept that
reveals the amount of information statistics from persistent homology can contain for cosmology,
which serves as the basis for further developing parameter inference pipelines.

3.1    Coarse-graining

Before defining the kind of operations we would like to perform on a set of halos based on topology,
we build the cosmologist’s intuition through coarse-graining concepts. As noted above, the large-
scale structure of the universe is a complex hierarchy of clusters, filament loops, and cosmic voids
across length scales. These physical objects naturally correspond to the features that arise from a
topological computation on the 3-dimensional spatial distribution of halos (Figure 1). The multi-
scale nature of the distribution implies that a feature may be distinguishable only within a restricted
range of coarse-graining scales.8 For example, two clusters separated by a distance L will no longer
be distinct once we coarse-grain to a length scale greater than L. Similarly, a cosmic void only
appears when the tracers defining its boundary are connected, and it will diminish and ultimately
vanish when its interior fills up as the length scale increases further. This interplay between the
coarse-graining scale and the births and deaths of features is illustrated in Figure 3.
   8
      At this point we rely on an intuitive picture of coarse-graining. We define specific coarse-graining schemes
(filtrations) in Section 3.3.




                                                      –7–
   Our approach in this work is to use persistent homology to track the distribution of topological
features across length scales. The formalism of persistent homology lets us compute the statistics
of the scales at which these features are created and destroyed (and the difference between these
two, i.e., a given feature’s “persistence”).

3.2     Topology of simplicial complexes

Topology investigates the set of properties of a mathematical space that are preserved under con-
tinuous deformations. To define a topological space for data represented as a point cloud, i.e., a
set of discrete points, we seek a way of linking the points, embedding the data within a simplicial
complex. A simplicial complex is an assembly of n-simplices which, in our 3-dimensional context,
includes vertices (n = 0), edges (n = 1), triangles (n = 2), and tetrahedra (n = 3). For instance,
consider four points where point A and point C are connected by a line segment, and point B and
D are disconnected. We may define a simplicial complex as the set that includes all the simplices,
i.e., the four vertices (A, B, C and D) and the one edge, AC. Subsets of this set are also simplicial
(sub)complexes, e.g., the subset that contains only the four vertices. These sets are built to be
closed under the intersection of simplices and under taking faces (e.g., if an edge is present, the two
vertices making up its boundary are also present).
    Given a simplicial complex built on a point cloud, we would like to identify deformation-invariant
objects. This is done by defining linear operators ∂p that take a collection of p-simplices to its (p−1)-
dimensional boundary. In words, a topological feature corresponds to a collection of p-simplices
with vanishing boundaries that are not themselves the boundary of a collection of (p + 1)-simplices.
The identification of a feature is done by finding the boundary of appropriate combinations of
(p + 1)-simplices. In particular, it is useful to define the quotient group Hp ≡ ker ∂p /im∂p+1 ,
i.e., the p-th homology group of the complex. Each element of Hp is an independent “hole” of
dimension p. More formally, the elements of Hp are equivalence classes of p-cycles—collections of
p-simplices with vanishing boundaries.9 The intuitive connection to deformation-invariance is that
two cycles belonging to the same homology class, as an equivalence class, can deform into each
other. Consequently, cycles that envelop distinct holes cannot be in the same homology class. As
an explicit example, there are only three homology classes of 1-cycles in Figure 4 (two small holes
adjacent to each other on the left, a bigger one on the right), while one may identify many closed
paths that circle each of them. For clarity, we point out that the addition of a p-simplex leads to
either the birth of a new homology class of p-cycles, or the death of an existing homology class of
(p − 1)-cycles. We refer the reader to [102, 103] for more mathematical details.

3.3     Coarse-graining via filtration

A single simplicial complex is insufficient to encapsulate the step-by-step details of the coarse-
graining procedure described earlier in Section 3.1. A family of complexes is required to capture
the evolving topology through the coarse-graining scales. Such a family is called a filtration, with the
coarse-graining scale represented by the non-negative filtration parameter, also called the filtration
time, ν. The filtration parameter can be used to track the time νbirth at which a homology class
    9
     In plain language, a 0-cycle is a collection of connected simplices, a 1-cycle is a loop, and a 2-cycle is an enclosed
cavity.




                                                          –8–
Figure 4: Emergence of topological features. A filtration is a nested family of simplicial
complexes. Shown here is the simplicial complex at a particular filtration time in the α-DTMℓ-
filtration of a point cloud (here we ignore the fact that vertices have non-trivial birth times and plot
all of them for illustrative purposes). Vertices, edges, triangles, and tetrahedra (n-simplices) from
the Delaunay triangulation of the point cloud are gradually added to the complex, at designated
filtration times determined by their sizes and the distributions of their surrounding neighbors.
Topological features as (p + 1)-dimensional holes, formally known as equivalence classes of p-cycles,
emerge and vanish throughout the filtration.


is born, and the time νdeath at which it dies later at a larger scale. The persistence νpersist is the
difference between the two, i.e., νpersist ≡ νdeath − νbirth .
    An intuitive example of a filtration is the Vietoris-Rips (VR) filtration. Let us consider a generic
point cloud X embedded in a N -dimensional metric space equipped with a distance function d(x, y).
The set of vertices of each simplicial complex in this filtration is the point cloud itself, X. The
criterion to include an edge connecting two vertices is that their separation satisfies d ≤ 2ν. The
intuitive picture here is that we can draw a growing N -ball of radius ν around each vertex. Any
time when, or after, two balls touch, the associated edge is included in the simplical complex.
Higher-dimensional simplices are included if all necessary faces are present. Although intuitive, the
VR filtration does not suit our point clouds because the inclusion scheme is rather inefficient: as
ν → ∞ there is an edge for every pair of vertices, a triangle for every triplet of vertices, and so
on. The computational cost becomes prohibitively expensive for large datasets like ours. In the
following, we focus on filtrations that are similar in spirit to the VR filtration, but computationally
more efficient.

α-filtration. Our method is based on the intuitive α-filtration [104]. In contrast with the VR
filtration, the embedding of the point cloud is done via its Delaunay triangulation rather than
to universally allow for an edge between any two vertices. Then, the simplicial complexes at




                                                 –9–
different times in an α-filtration are subcomplexes of the Delaunay complex [104].10 The appealing
aspect of Delaunay subcomplexes is the dramatic reduction in the total number of simplices. This
reduction offsets the computational overhead involved in finding these complexes, making the overall
algorithm more computationally efficient than the VR filtration.11
    The fact that every point is treated equally in the α-filtration, in the sense that it makes no
difference to the algorithm whether or not a point is in a sparsely populated region, is perhaps an
unappealing property. As an example, consider a large, empty void that dies at ν ′ . If we put a
point in its center, the feature will die at ν ′ /2 instead. This is not desirable as this single point
should be considered as an outlier, not impacting significantly the defining length scale of the void.
That is to say, the α-filtration is not stable against the addition of outliers. In light of this, we
introduce the α-DTMℓ-filtration.12

α-DTMℓ-filtration. To lessen this disproportionate effect of outliers, the filtration time at which
a simplex is added should be postponed depending on how much of an outlier each of the vertices
involved is. Recall that, in the VR filtration, a 1-simplex is added when the imaginary balls around
two vertices touch. In the α-DTMℓ-filtration [107], instead of using ν as the uniform radius, we
employ the point-specific radius function

                                             rx (ν) = (ν q − f (x)q )1/q ,                                        (3.1)

i.e., the radius of the ball around point x at a given ν depends on a function f of the point itself, and
a parameter q that controls the mixing between ν and f (x). The parameter q could be made tunable
to investigate how to maximize (minimized) certain desired (undesired) aspects of the filtration.
Here we choose q = 2 and devote a thorough investigation into an optimal choice to future work.
Note that f (x) accounts for the “unimportance” of the point x and impedes the growth of its ball
as shown in Figure 5. Hence, f (x) should take a large value for a halo that lives in a sparsely
populated region, and vice versa. The Distance-to-Measure (DTM) function suits this purpose:
                                                                                   1/p
                                                          1     X
                               f (x) = DTM(x) ≡                           ∥x − Xi ∥p                            (3.2)
                                                          k
                                                              Xi ∈Nk (x)

where Nk (x) is the set of k-nearest neighbors to x, and p is a mixing parameter. For Eq. (3.1) to
properly describe a radius, any point x is added to the simplicial complex at ν = f (x). As a result,
   10
       The Delaunay complex can be defined in the following way. Given a set of points X ⊂ Rd , the Voronoi cell of
a point x ∈ X is defined as Vx = {y ∈ Rd | ||x − y|| ≤ ||z − y|| ∀z ∈ X}. Informally, Vx includes all points in Rd to
which x is the nearest (or tied as the nearest) among all other points in X. The collection of these cells triangulates
the space in which the point cloud is embedded and constitutes the Voronoi diagram of X. The Delaunay complex
is defined via the Voronoi diagram by {σ ⊆ X | ∩x∈σ Vx ̸= ∅}.
    11
       This is related to the fact that the Delaunay triangulation is inherently geometric, as opposed to the VR complex
in which the number of simplices is very large, yet many are “unphysical”.
    12
       Note that in a cosmological sense, no halo or galaxy is an “outlier”. Nevertheless, as we show below, introducing
a weight on each point based on its neighbors effectively helps extract information from different scales. In fact, it
is reasonable to expect that topological signals of interesting physics may be recovered more optimally by tuning a
local bias-like parameter. For example, underdense features like voids are sensitive to diffuse sources such as massive
neutrinos [105]. Moreover, it has been shown that it might be interesting to select outlier galaxies inside voids [106].
Our approach can be modified to investigate these ideas in more detail; these studies are reserved for future work.




                                                        – 10 –
Figure 5: α-filtration vs. α-DTMℓ-filtration. Here we use as an example a 1-cycle (the
circular loop) with an outlier (a point) in the center. Left: The growing ball around every point
has a uniform radius that is equal to the filtration time ν. Right: Characterized by the Distance-
to-Measure function f , the more outlying a point is, the more impeded the growth of its ball
is. Therefore, edges and higher-dimensional simplices that trivialize this 1-cycle are added at
postponed times, i.e., the 1-cycle survives longer. Hence, the α-DTMℓ-filtration is more stable
against the addition of outliers.


νbirth values of 0-cycles become nontrivial and contain information on the local density of the point
cloud. As before, high-dimensional simplices are added when all faces are present.
    Heuristically, DTM(x) calculates the average distance from x to its k-nearest neighbors when
p = 1. Again, k and p are tunable parameters in principle. While we choose p = 2 in this
work such that DTM(x) is the root mean square distance, it turns out that the nearest-neighbor
parameter k significantly impacts the filtration. In Figure 6, we show snapshots of the simplicial
complex at different times (early to late from left to right) in the filtration for k = 1, 15, and 60
(top to bottom). Note that to fairly compare k values (snapshots in the same column), we must
also vary the filtration time ν. This is because f (x) which controls the birth times of vertices
increases monotonically with k, then in general birth and death times of all topological features are
positively offset when a larger k is used. From the comparison, we observe that fewer small-scale
features emerge across all stages in the filtration for a larger k, suggesting that a large-k filtration
encompasses the persistent homology of large-scale features. This is no surprise, as increasing k
effectively increases the average volume within which the algorithm explores for the densest regions
to populate with simplices. Hence, when k is set to be larger, some regions are deemed no longer
dense enough for early population, leaving space for larger holes (features) to emerge.
    Given a single value of k, whether the features tracked are considered large depends on the
volume and the number density of the point cloud. On this account, we vary k and make use of
all the resulting filtrations to maximize the amount of topological information we extract. This is
done by concatenating the data vectors, each from one filtration, which we discuss in the following
sections.




                                                – 11 –
Figure 6: Effect of k on the α-DTMℓ-filtration. Left to Right: Early, middle, and late stages
in the α-DTMℓ-filtration of a sample of Quijote halos (for clarity, all halos are plotted regardless
of their birth times as 0-cycles). Top to Bottom: Increasing value of the nearest-neighbor parameter
k. For a fair comparison between k values in each column, the filtration time ν at which we inspect
the simplicial complex varies with k, since birth (and death) times of features are positively offset
when a larger k is used. Across all stages, there are fewer small-scale 0- and 1-cycles in the larger-k
setups. This suggests that a large-k filtration encompasses the persistent homology of large-scale
topological features, and vice versa. We encourage the reader to watch the filtrations in action:
https://youtu.be/_phgkiZmY0c.



                                                – 12 –
3.4       Persistence diagrams and images

When applying persistent homology to 3-dimensional spatial distributions of dark matter halos, the
outputs from a single filtration are three lists of (νbirth , νpersist ) pairs,13 one for each of the three
homological dimensions. They can be presented in the form of persistence diagrams. In Figure 7,
we show persistence diagrams representative of the fiducial Quijote halo catalogs along with their
corresponding persistence images. A persistence image is obtained by first applying a smoothing
kernel to every point in a persistence diagram, after which we discretize the birth-persistence plane
and sum up all kernel contributions within each pixel. Given that most features are short-lived, we
customarily weigh each point by its persistence to emphasize the more persistent features.
   Persistence images are useful for intuitively understanding how changes in the point cloud, due
to parameters relevant to cosmology in our context, affect the persistence diagrams and, thus,
the topology. Specifically, for a parameter θ, we can calculate the difference between the mean
persistence images from the “plus” (θ+ ) and “minus” (θ− ) cosmologies. In Figure 8, we show two
examples: Ωm on the left and fNL local on the right, both for 1-cycles. The most distinctive change in

the number of features is observed within a range of birth scales. For instance, when Ωm is above
(below) its fiducial value, more (fewer) 1-cycles tend to form at around 27 Mpc/h and fewer (more)
                                                                               local .14 This motivates
at scales smaller or larger than that. The opposite behavior is observed for fNL
the construction of a data vector of feature counts in birth (and death) scale bins as our statistic,
which we explain in the next section.

Software. We use the public code15 developed in [79] to compute α-DTMℓ-filtrations of halo cat-
alogs, as detailed in the previous sections, and GUDHI [108] to perform the persistence calculations.


4        From Persistence Diagrams to Summary Statistic

A persistence diagram needs to be vectorized to generate a data vector, as it is a 2D multiset
with a variable number of points that are not ordered. The vectorization results in a summary
statistic, which is generally a compression of the information originally contained. It is desirable that
the compression remains sensitive to cosmological parameter changes, i.e., it retains a substantial
amount of cosmological information.
    One may flatten the persistence images and concatenate the resulting vectors, but it is unclear
if this statistic has a Gaussian likelihood which is required for our Fisher forecast setup16 . The
high dimensionality (number of pixels) of the images also poses difficulties in the estimation of
the covariance matrix and the convergence of the forecast constraints due to the limited number
of available simulations. Hence, we attempt to devise simpler summary statistics. The triangular
pattern of each persistence diagram (Figures 7 and 8) suggests the following statistics recently
studied in the literature:
    13
      We exclude short-lived topological features with νpersist ≤ 0.01 Mpc/h.
    14
      Plots for all parameters and homological dimensions are shown in Appendix E.
   15
      https://gitlab.com/mbiagetti/persistent_homology_lss
   16
      See [80] for a less restricted scenario of using persistence images in combination with a convolutional neural
network model for cosmological parameter estimation.




                                                      – 13 –
Figure 7: Persistence diagrams and images. Top Panel: Persistence diagrams of 0-, 1-, and
2-cycles from the filtration of a Quijote halo catalog with k = 15 at the fiducial cosmology. Np is
the total number of p-cycles in each diagram, i.e., the total number of p-cycles once existed in the
filtration. Bottom Panel: Corresponding persistence images from “pixelating” the diagrams.


      • 1-dimensional curves: In [79], we scanned each persistence diagram in different directions,
        thereby defining empirical distribution functions of ν. For example, along the birth axis, the
        function is the count of all features born at scales larger than ν.

      • Histograms of births and deaths: In [84], we used histograms of νbirth and νdeath values. These
        are summaries simpler than the 1-dimensional curves since counts from different scales are
        not stacked, and their responses to changes in the cosmology typically converge better.

   In other contexts, there exist several proposals for this map [109–112]. A promising approach
would be to parameterize the map by a neural network, imposing that the network is permutation
invariant to the input topological features [113, 114]. While these techniques require detailed
investigations of their applications to real datasets, in this paper, we opt for the simpler approach
of constructing histograms, being aware that this method of compression is likely suboptimal.

4.1     Description of the data vector

We build our histogram data vector by counting the number of features in birth and death bins.
From a single filtration, a set of 6 histograms17 can be obtained: 3 from the birth distributions of
  17
     Note that the minimum and maximum scales probed by these histograms are fixed regardless of the cosmology,
and we remove values above the 99.9th percentile (also death values below the 0.01th percentile) to avoid effects due
to sparsity.




                                                      – 14 –
                                                             1-cycles
                                           −                                                      local+    local−
                                     Ω+
                                      m − Ωm          ×102                                       fNL     − fNL     ×102
                                                             5                                                            5
                              15                                                            15

        Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                      Persistence (Mpc/h)
                              10                                                            10
                                                             0                                                            0
                               5                                                             5

                                                             −5                                                           −5
                               0                                                             0
                                   15      30    45                                              15      30    45
                                    Birth (Mpc/h)                                                 Birth (Mpc/h)



Figure 8: Persistence image difference. To intuitively understand how a cosmological param-
eter impacts the topology, we can compare two persistence diagrams by computing the persistence
image difference. Here, with k = 15 and using 100 catalogs, we subtract the mean persistence image
of the minus (θ− ) cosmology from that of the plus (θ+ ) cosmology for Ωm (left) and fNL
                                                                                       local (right).
                                                         +
Regions in blue (red) have more (fewer) 1-cycles in the θ cosmology. The triangular pattern hints
that statistics built from birth and death counts would be informative about the cosmology. Plots
for all parameters and homological dimensions are shown in Appendix E.


the 0-, 1-, and 2-cycles (B0 , B1 , B2 ), and the other 3 from the death distributions (D0 , D1 , D2 ).
As elaborated in Section 3.3, we vary the nearest-neighbor parameter k (Eq. (3.2)) and use the
joint vector of 6 sets of these histograms, corresponding to 6 values of k ∈ {1, 5, 15, 30, 60, 100}.
Although this construction of the data vector is intentionally kept generic and not optimized for
the tightest possible constraints in this work, we can show that each component contributes a fair
amount of independent information, see Appendix C.
   For visualization, we show

   • The full data vector for the fiducial cosmology (Figure 9), which is the concatenation of the
     6 × 6 = 36 histograms, averaged over 14500 realizations.

   • The subset of the data vector corresponding to k = 15 for the fiducial and varying Ωm
     cosmologies (Figure 10), averaged over 14500 (fiducial) and 1500 (Ω±     m ) realizations. As shown
     in the figure, within each k, the histograms of birth and death values are concatenated in the
     order of {B0 , B1 , B2 , D0 , D1 , D2 }. The lower panel shows the percentage deviations of the Ω±m
     cosmologies from the fiducial one.

We have tested various data vector sizes, ranging from 360 to 11160 for the total number of bins Nbin .
We choose Nbin = 1260 for our reported results, a decision driven by balancing the Gaussianity of
our statistic, the convergence of the numerical derivatives, and the need for powerful constraints.
We expand on these considerations in Appendix B.




                                                                 – 15 –
                                                                  Fiducial
                10000              k=1         k=5         k = 15           k = 30         k = 60          k = 100
Count




                        5000



                           0
                               1         210         420             630             840            1050             1260
                                                                    Bin #

Figure 9: Full data vector. Displayed here for the fiducial cosmology is our full data vec-
tor, which is the concatenation of 6 sets of histograms with the nearest-neighbor parameter
k ∈ {1, 5, 15, 30, 60, 100}. For each value of k, that subset of the data vector contains a total
of 6 histograms: one from the birth distribution and another from death for each of the 3 homo-
logical dimensions.




                                                                    k = 15
                        4000
                                                                                                             Fiducial
                        3000                                                                                 Ω+
                                                                                                              m
        Countθ




                                                                                                             Ω−
                                                                                                              m
                        2000

                        1000
 Countθ /CountFid − 1




                          0
                        10%
                           0
               −10%
                               1   B0    35     B1   70      B2      105      D0     140     D1      175      D2        210
                                                                    Bin #

Figure 10: Varying cosmologies. Top Panel: Subset of the full data vector corresponding to
k = 15 for the fiducial (dotted black), Ω+                      −
                                         m (solid green), and Ωm (solid red) cosmologies, averaged
                                  ±
over 14500 (fiducial) and 1500 (Ωm ) realizations. Vertical dashed lines separate histograms of the
birth (Bp ) and death (Dp ) values for p-dimensional cycles. Bottom Panel: Percentage deviations
of the Ω±
        m cosmologies from the fiducial one.




                                                              – 16 –
                                                            Fiducial
                                                                                        k=1              k = 30
        10000                                                                           k=5              k = 60
                                                                                        k = 15           k = 100
         7500
Count




         5000

         2500

            0
                1   B0     35      B1       70         B2      105      D0      140      D1        175   D2        210
                                                              Bin #


Figure 11: Varying k values. Displayed here are subsets of the fiducial full data vector corre-
sponding to k = 1, 5, 15, 30, 60, and 100. The skewness of the histograms varies and the peaks
become lower as k increases.


Impact of k. In Figure 11 we compare the 6 sets of histograms from filtrations with the different
values of the nearest-neighbor parameter k. As k increases, the skewness of the histograms varies,
and the peaks become lower in accordance with Figure 6 that a larger k value causes persistent
homology to track fewer but larger-scale features. Note that the histograms do not share the
same bins across k values, otherwise we would also see the peaks shift towards the larger-scale
bins (to the right) as k increases. The 6 values of k are chosen empirically, while in theory the
information maximizing combination of values can be found from optimizing the forecast result,
which is addressed in the related work [115].

4.2       Covariance

In Figure 12 we show the correlation matrix of our full data vector at the fiducial cosmology, defined
as
                                                   Cij
                                         rij = p          ,                                      (4.1)
                                                  Cii Cjj
where Cij is the covariance matrix
                                            N
                                            Xsim
                                    1
                         Cij =                     [(DFid )i − ⟨DFid ⟩i ][(DFid )j − ⟨DFid ⟩j ],               (4.2)
                                 Nsim − 1
                                            N =1

with Nsim = 14500 fiducial realizations and ⟨DFid ⟩ being the mean data vector over those realiza-
tions. The diagonal stripe pattern in the figure is due to the fact that the 36 peaks (one from each
histogram) in the data vector shift together across bins. For example, delays in the births of 0-cycles
in general cause delays in their deaths, as well as in the births and deaths of higher-dimensional




                                                         – 17 –
             1260                                                                                                 1.0

         k = 100

             1050

         k = 60                                                                                                   0.5

              840

         k = 30
 Bin #




              630                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                        √ Cij
         k = 15                                                                                                           CiiCjj

              420

          k=5                                                                                                     −0.5

              210

          k=1

                   1                                                                                              −1.0
                       1         210         420            630            840            1050             1260
                           k=1         k=5         k = 15         k = 30         k = 60          k = 100
                                                        Bin #

Figure 12: Correlation matrix of the full data vector at the fiducial cosmology. Positive
(negative) correlations are in blue (red). Each block, outlined by dashed lines, contains the cor-
relations between two subsets of the data vector corresponding to the same or different k values.
Larger-k bins are more strongly correlated, indicating that the amount of information extractable
is saturating.

features. We also observe that the larger k bins are more strongly correlated, indicating that the
amount of information extractable by including more larger values of k is getting saturated.

5        From Summary Statistic to Cosmological Constraints

The Quijote suite is designed for numerically evaluating the information content of a summary
statistic via the Fisher information matrix at the fiducial cosmology. If the likelihood function of a
data vector D is Gaussian, the Fisher matrix elements are18
                                                           T
                                                    Fij = D,θ i
                                                                C −1 D,θj                                                       (5.1)
    18
     Note that we conservatively neglect the dependence of the covariance matrix on the parameters, see footnote 9
of [84] for a detailed explanation.




                                                             – 18 –
where C −1 is the inverse of the covariance matrix, and D,θi denotes the derivative of D with re-
spect to the parameter θi . C −1 and D,θi are computed numerically using the fiducial and varying
cosmologies of Quijote, respectively.19 Therefore, this symmetric matrix is of the size 7 × 7 for
                                                              P
our 7 cosmological parameters θcosmo = {Ωm , Ωb , h, ns , σ8 , mν , w}. When considering primordial
non-Gaussianity, the size is 10 × 10, since we include all three shapes at the same time and also
marginalize over the cosmological parameters. The diagonal of the inverse of the Fisher matrix
contains (the lower bound on) the variance of, hence the marginalized constraints on, the parame-
ters.
   The focus of this work is to compare persistent homology against the conventional low-order
correlation functions, i.e., the 2- and 3-point statistics. Specifically, the two data vectors are, respec-
tively, from our persistent homology pipeline (hereafter labeled as P H) and from combining, up to
k = 0.3 h/Mpc, the power spectrum monopole and quadrupole as well as the bispectrum monopole
(labeled as P0 + P2 + B0 ). We run consistency checks on our results and various components of the
calculations, which we present in Appendix B.

5.1     Constraints on cosmological parameters

We show the confidence contours for the cosmological parameters in Figure 13.20 Note that each
contour is marginalized over all other cosmological parameters, and the three primordial non-
Gaussianity amplitudes are fixed at their fiducial value 0. The 1-σ constraints from persistent
homology are tighter than those from the joint power spectrum and bispectrum statistic by 23−50%
for all cosmological parameters except Ωm .21 We claim that this is primarily due to persistent
homology assessing information of high-order correlators, as topological features are built from
associating multiple points.
    While it is unclear how we can assign to our summary statistic the precise range of scales
it probes, we propose that most of the information comes from scales above 2π/(0.3 h/Mpc) =
21 Mpc/h, which is the minimum scale for the joint power spectrum and bispectrum statistic. This
is evident when examining the persistence images in Figure 7, where most 1- and 2-cycles are born
between νbirth ≈ 25 − 40 Mpc/h. As detailed in Section 3.3, νbirth corresponds to half of the length
of the 1-simplex22 that triggers the creation of a cycle. The length scale of the created cycle is
expected to be larger than that of the 1-simplex; therefore, the scales of the 1- and 2-cycles from
which we extract information exceed 2νbirth ≈ 50 − 80 Mpc/h.23 For the 0-cycles, νbirth instead
                                                                                       −1              −Nbin −2 −1
   19
      We include the Hartlap factor [116] for the unbiased estimation of C −1 , i.e., Cunbiased = Nsim
                                                                                                     Nsim −1
                                                                                                               C . For
the numerical estimation of D,θi , see Appendix A.
   20
      The attentive reader may have noticed that we are allowing for unphysical negative values of the total neutrino
mass. To obtain physically sound posteriors from sampling, one should discard samples that are associated with
negative total neutrino masses. This implies that the resulting posteriors will all be non-Gaussian, strictly speaking.
In practice, we have verified that this procedure modifies the contours for other parameters only negligibly. Therefore,
we stick to symmetrical distributions of total neutrino mass values for illustrative purposes.
   21
      The percentage improvement is defined as (σP0 +P2 +B0 − σP H )/σP0 +P2 +B0 .
   22
      The filtration parameter ν is roughly the radius of the growing ball around each vertex, and a 1-simplex is added
to the simplicial complex when two balls touch.
   23
      Strictly speaking, since νbirth values in an α-DTMℓ-filtration are delayed by the DTM function (Eq. 3.1), the
range of minimum scales quoted here is an overestimation. Nevertheless, as stated the length scales of the cycles are
expected to be larger than 2νbirth , and there is also a considerable margin between 21 and 50 Mpc/h.




                                                        – 19 –
                                                                                               PH
                 06
               0.




                                                                                               P0 + P2 + B 0
      Ωb
                 05
               0.




                                                                                               P H + P0 + P2 + B 0
                 04
               0.
                  7
                0.
      h
                  6
                0.
               1.
                 00
      ns
                 95
               0.
                 85 90
               0. 0.
                 84
      σ8
               0.
                 83
               0.
     mν (eV)
                 1 2
               0. 0. 8
                  0
                0.
   P
                  1
                0.
           −
                  9
                0.
           −
      w
                  0
                1.
           −
                  1
                1.
           −



                          0

                               5

                                       0
                                      04


                                           05


                                                 06
                                                   6


                                                           7


                                                                90

                                                                     95

                                                                           00

                                                                                82

                                                                                     83

                                                                                          84

                                                                                                −.85
                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                          0


                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                              9
                         30

                              32

                                    35




                                                0.


                                                       0.




                                                                                                  0.


                                                                                                          0.


                                                                                                               0.

                                                                                                                    1.

                                                                                                                         1.

                                                                                                                              0.

                                                                                                 P
                                   0.


                                           0.


                                                0.




                                                               0.

                                                                     0.

                                                                          1.

                                                                                0.

                                                                                     0.

                                                                                          0.

                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                    −

                                                                                                                         −

                                                                                                                              −
                         0.

                              0.

                                   0.




                              Ωm           Ωb          h              ns              σ8                 mν (eV)         w


Figure 13: Confidence contours for cosmological parameters. A comparison of the
marginalized contours marking the 68% and 95% confidence regions from persistent homology
(P H), redshift space halo power spectrum monopole and quadrupole and bispectrum monopole
(P0 + P2 + B0 ), and combining the two (P H + P0 + P2 + B0 ). The degeneracy directions differ for
the two statistics, and as a result contours from combining are considerably more constraining for
most of the parameters.




                                                               – 20 –
                                                                       PH
                                                                       P0 + P2 + B 0
                                                                       P H + P0 + P2 + B 0
                        0
                      50
              equil
             fNL
                       0
                       0
                      50
                  −
                       0
                      20
              ortho
             fNL
                       00
                      20
                  −


                            0


                                  0



                                            0


                                                   0

                                                         0


                                                                 0


                                                                        0


                                                                                 0



                                                                                            0
                            20




                                          20


                                                 50




                                                                 50


                                                                       20




                                                                                          20
                           −




                                                −




                                                                      −



                                  local                  equil                  ortho
                                 fNL                    fNL                    fNL

Figure 14: Confidence contours for primordial non-Gaussianity amplitudes. A compar-
ison of the marginalized contours marking the 68% and 95% confidence regions from persistent
homology (P H), redshift space halo power spectrum monopole and quadrupole and bispectrum
monopole (P0 + P2 + B0 ), and combining the two (P H + P0 + P2 + B0 ).


corresponds inversely to the number density around a halo. Given that from Figure 7 most 0-
cycles are born between νbirth ≈ 20 − 25 Mpc/h, they are consistent with information from scales
≳ 21 Mpc/h.24 .
    Another observation is that the parameter degeneracies for our statistic are in directions fairly
different from those for the joint power spectrum and bispectrum statistic. This implies that we
can break degeneracies by combining the two statistics and obtain constraints that are tightened
by 12 − 33%. We show the contours from combining in orange in the same Figure and summarize
all 1-σ constraints in Table 2. Here we point out a few major observations:
  24
     The analysis here focuses on values from Figure 7 where the nearest-neighbor parameter is k = 15. Yet the
argument applies to the other k values, except for the 0-cycles from k = 1 and 5, which indeed have small νbirth
values. However, there is no cause for alarm, as they contribute only limitedly to our data vector (see Appendix C).




                                                       – 21 –
      • P H shows stronger degeneracies in the σ8 -Ωm , h-Ωm , and w-Ωm planes with respect to P0 +
        P2 + B0 . This might be due to the fact that persistent homology is more sensitive to the local
        number density of points (or more specifically the inter-halo distance), which changes in a
        degenerate way for these parameters.

      • P H shows weaker degeneracies in the σ8 -w, Ωb -h, and Ωb -ns planes. They allow for the gains
        in constraining power from combining the statistics and deserve future investigations.
                                           P
      • Overall, constraints on σ8 , w and mν are considerably improved with respect to P0 +P2 +B0 .
        We reiterate that given the simplistic setup, these constraints should not be taken at face
        value, but only in the relative sense. Nevertheless, especially in the case of massive neutrinos,
        such an improvement may be expected given the higher sensitivity of our statistic to mildly
        non-linear scales, as noted above.

5.2     Constraints on primordial non-Gaussianity

We show the confidence contours for the primordial non-Gaussianity amplitudes in Figure 14. Each
contour is marginalized over all cosmological parameters and the one primordial non-Gaussianity
amplitude remaining. While the volume of the Quijote catalogs is insufficient to give interest-
ing constraints for these non-Gaussianity shapes, our analysis sheds light on whether a summary
statistic that contains information of high-order correlators helps for the equilateral and orthogonal
shapes, which do not have a strong scale dependence at large scales unlike the local one (see [14]
for a recent review on the effect of primordial non-Gaussianity on biased tracers). We observe in
                                                                                  equil      ortho . On
Figure 14 that constraints from persistent homology are indeed tighter for fNL          and fNL
the other hand, fNLlocal is as expected best constrained by the joint power spectrum and bispectrum

statistic, since most information is in the large scales, while there are only so many large-scale
holes for persistent homology to track. As for breaking parameter degeneracies, combining the two
statistics tightens the constraints by 11−17%, which are more modest improvements in comparison
to those for the cosmological parameters.


6     Conclusions and Future Directions

In a series of recent papers [79, 80, 84], we have explored a class of summary statistics based on
persistent homology, a formalism within the field of computational topology, which we customize for
quantifying the morphology of the cosmic web as a distribution of clusters, loops, and voids across
scales. In this work, with a histogram-based statistic, we have measured its information content
through a Fisher analysis and reported constraints on cosmological parameters and primordial
non-Gaussianity amplitudes.
   We have presented a comparison between these constraints from persistent homology and those
from statistics currently used in cosmological survey analyses, namely the power spectrum and the
bispectrum. We have found that persistent homology outperforms the conventional statistics for
8 out of the 10 parameters by margins of 13 − 50%. Combining the methods breaks degeneracies
between parameters and further tightens the constraints. We claim that this is expected, since
persistent homology probes high-order correlations complementary to the 2- and 3-point statistics




                                                  – 22 –
       θ         Fiducial          PH                   P0 + P2 + B0          P H + P0 + P2 + B0
     Ωm         0.3175           ±0.012                    ±0.010                   ±0.008
     Ωb         0.049            ±0.003                    ±0.004                   ±0.002
      h         0.6711           ±0.029                    ±0.040                   ±0.022
     ns         0.9624           ±0.024                    ±0.031                   ±0.019
     σ8         0.834            ±0.005                    ±0.008                   ±0.004
  P
    mν (eV)        0             ±0.034                    ±0.063                   ±0.030
     w            −1             ±0.051                    ±0.101                   ±0.042
      local
     fNL            0             ±69                       ±36                      ±30
      equil
     fNL            0             ±142                      ±233                     ±126
      ortho
     fNL            0             ±61                       ±70                      ±51

Table 2: 1-σ constraints. 1-σ Fisher constraints from persistent homology (P H), redshift space
halo power spectrum monopole and quadrupole and bispectrum monopole (P0 + P2 + B0 ), and
combining the two (P H + P0 + P2 + B0 ). These results are for a 1 (Gpc/h)3 volume at z = 0.5 for
tracers with a number density of n̄ ≈ 9.88×10−5 (h/Mpc)3 . The cosmological parameter constraints
are marginalized over all parameters except the three primordial non-Gaussianity amplitudes, which
are set to 0. Constraints on primordial non-Gaussianity amplitudes are marginalized over all
parameters.


through topological features constructed from many vertices. Our results strongly motivate further
investigations of utilizing persistent homology in constraining parameters with actual survey data.
   In this perspective, this work suggests several directions for future work:

   • Maximizing information. Data compression with persistent homology is subject to various
     choices leading to the final summary statistic. There is the freedom to choose a specific filtra-
     tion, set the hyperparameters within the filtration, and then define a vectorization strategy.
     Many of these are “discrete” choices, i.e., there are finitely many options in, e.g., choosing
     a particular filtration or vectorization. There are also hyperparameters to fine tune, such
     as the nearest-neighbor parameter k relevant to this work. To determine the best choices
     and values, we should optimize the analysis pipeline for maximized information, by defining
     a well-behaved figure of merit that measures the information content, and an algorithm to
     update the pipeline towards the optimal compression. Then it seems natural to use (the neg-
     ative of) the Fisher information as the loss function of a neural network that parameterizes
     the pipeline, as proposed in the recent work [117]. We are currently implementing similar
     methods to optimize the mixing parameters q and p in the α-DTMℓ-filtration [115].

   • Inference pipeline. The Fisher constraints obtained in this work are only parameter uncer-
     tainty estimates. When analyzing real data, we would want to infer parameter values from
     our summary statistic measured on the dataset. As a recent example, [80] implemented a
     pipeline utilizing a convolutional neural network model to map persistence images to σ8 and
     Ωm , and the result is encouraging and in agreement with ours. However, to include many
     more parameters for a full-fledged pipeline appears computationally infeasible, as it would




                                               – 23 –
     require an enormous number of simulations, either for the training dataset or for numerically
     evaluating the likelihood function in a more standard setup. While this has always been a
     problem for any simulation-based inference approaches like ours, we suggest mitigating it by
     employing persistent homology for data compression. For instance, it may be as reasonably
     effective but overall much less costly, to first calculate persistence diagrams and then to use
     them as inputs for a much smaller machine learning model, than to have a huge model trained
     directly on catalogs each containing hundreds of thousands of halo positions. Additionally,
     various stability theorems state that persistent homology outputs are stable against small per-
     turbations in the input data [118], which may justify the use of fast simulations to drastically
     reduce computational time. To summarize, we propose incorporating persistent homology
     into inference pipelines for increased efficiency.

   • Realistic galaxy survey data. The construction of our statistic from persistent homology
     is well-defined and can be readily applied to any cosmological point cloud simulated in a box,
     such as a galaxy catalog at a particular redshift. However, in reality, galaxies are observed in
     lightcones and each survey is characterized by its geometry and systematics. As an example,
     analyses of the BOSS survey data are plagued by so-called fiber collisions, which affect the
     determination of redshifts and, consequently, the modeling of the galaxy redshift space power
     spectrum [119]. On the other hand, persistent homology might be insensitive to certain
     systematics; we expect those that merely cause slight displacements of galaxies at the map
     level will not significantly affect our statistic, thanks to the stability theorems mentioned
     earlier. However, other ones that lead to systematic removal or addition of vertices could
     have substantial, unmitigable impacts. In general, a thorough survey-specific study of the
     systematics is necessary when working with real data. Moreover, it might be beneficial to
     characterize in detail our framework as a function of galaxy properties, such as luminosity,
     color, and mass, and determine the effects of assembly bias on our statistic.

   As a final comment, we must be aware that our method suffers the same challenge of robustness
that all simulation-based methods do: the information we extract from a model is only as reliable as
the simulations themselves are, and it is difficult to distinguish cosmological from non-cosmological
information at scales close to the accuracy scale of the simulations. This problem is likely worsened
when we include baryons. A recent example in [41], where convolutional neural networks are trained
on gas temperature maps for cosmological parameter inference, found that a network trained on
one simulation, the IllustrisTNG [120], fails dramatically when applied to maps generated from
another simulation suite, the simba simulations [121].

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Emilio Bellini and Juan Calles for their help in testing the galaxy mock catalogs,
which did not make the final cut of this project as explained in Appendix D. The authors thank
William Coulton for discussions on the convergence of Fisher forecasts. The work of J.H.T.Y.
and G.S. is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of High Energy
Physics under Award Numbers DE-SC-0023719 and DE-SC-0017647. M.B. is supported by the
Programma Nazionale della Ricerca (PNR) grant J95F21002830001 with title “FAIR-by-design”.




                                               – 24 –
    Numerical computations were performed 1) under the NWO project “Topological echoes of
primordial physics in cosmological observables.” on the Dutch National Computing facilities, and
2) using the computing resources and assistance of the University of Wisconsin-Madison Center for
High Throughput Computing (CHTC) [122] in the Department of Computer Sciences. The CHTC
is supported by UW-Madison, the Advanced Computing Initiative, the Wisconsin Alumni Research
Foundation, the Wisconsin Institutes for Discovery, and the National Science Foundation, and is
an active member of the OSG Consortium, which is supported by the National Science Foundation
and the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.


A     Numerical Derivatives

The data vector derivatives required for the Fisher matrix (Eq. (5.1)) are computed via the finite
difference scheme:
                                             ⟨Dθ+ ⟩ − ⟨Dθ− ⟩
                                       D,θ =                                                (A.1)
                                                   ∆θ
where ⟨Dθ± ⟩ are the mean data vectors from the varying cosmologies for the parameter θ, averaged
over the 1500 realizations. Eq. (A.1) is used for all cosmological and primordial non-Gaussianity
                    P
parameters but not     mν , for which we use

                          ⟨DP mν =0.4 ⟩ − 12⟨DP mν =0.2 ⟩ + 32⟨DP mν =0.1 ⟩ − 21⟨DP mν =0 ⟩
             D ,P m ν =                                                                         (A.2)
                                                      12(0.1)

instead, as advised in [88]. ⟨DP mν =0 ⟩ is measured from the fiducial simulations with Zeldovich
initial conditions in consistency with the other quantities involving massive neutrinos. We plot the
derivatives in Figure 15.


B    On Choice of Nbin and Fisher Analysis Consistency Checks

Unlike the power spectrum and the bispectrum, our statistic that supposedly probes a range of
high-order correlators is not explicitly constrained by a low number of modes, and we may capture
more information by having more bins in our data vector, until the point where the gain in signal
is outweighed by the amount of noise introduced (Figure 16). In other words, increasing Nbin leads
to tightened parameter constraints that are also generally less converged, given that the number
of realizations available is limited. On the other hand, our way of estimating the Fisher matrix
(Eq. (5.1)) requires that our statistic has a Gaussian likelihood. Since our data vector is built from
feature counts, it will deviate from Gaussianity if the counts are low for a sufficiently large Nbin .
   All things considered, we find Nbin = 1260 to be a suitable choice for making our point that
persistent homology yields powerful statistics, as well as for trustworthy forecast estimates. We
report on the following consistency checks:

Gaussianity.    We perform two tests:

    1. Kolmogorov-Smirnov test: This test checks the Gaussianity of each bin. We draw 50 random
       realizations and average over 20 draws. For all parameters, we find that > 96% of all the




                                                 – 25 –
                                                                   k = 15
                1.0


                0.5
D,θ (scaled)




                0.0


               −0.5                                                                                                      local
                                                                                            Ωm           σ8             fNL
                                                                                                         P
                                                                                            Ωb                mν         equil
                                                                                                                        fNL
                                                                                            h            w               ortho
                                                                                                                        fNL
               −1.0                                                                         ns

                      1   B0      35          B1     70      B2      105     D0     140          D1      175       D2            210
                                                                    Bin #


Figure 15: Numerical derivatives of the data vector. The numerical derivatives (k = 15)
displayed here are scaled between [−1, 1] for illustrative purposes.


                                                                    Nderiv = 1500 (reported)
                                      0.020
                                                                    Nderiv = 6000 (extrapolated)

                                      0.015
                               σ Ωm




                                      0.010

                                      0.005
                                          360 1260        3600      5400    7200     9000        10800
                                                                     Nbin

Figure 16: Diminishing marginal return in information with Nbin . Here we show, taking
Ωm as an example, that the 1-σ marginalized constraint tightens and eventually plateaus as we
use more bins in our data vector. The blue line is (would be) the reported constraint from using
all the existent 1500 realizations in the estimation of the derivatives, while the orange marks
the extrapolated constraint if 6000 realizations were available, as explained in Appendix B. The
dashed line marks our final choice of Nbin = 1260, which is conservatively decided to preserve the
Gaussianity of the statistic and warrant that the constraints are reasonably converged.


                1260 bins pass the test within the 95% confidence interval. We also visually inspect the bins,
                and the histograms for 20 randomly selected bins are presented in Figure 17.




                                                                 – 26 –
             Bin 120             Bin 141            Bin 161              Bin 287             Bin 319




             Bin 345             Bin 400            Bin 426              Bin 467             Bin 495




             Bin 511             Bin 550            Bin 632              Bin 789             Bin 918




             Bin 959             Bin 964            Bin 989             Bin 1076            Bin 1235




Figure 17: Gaussianity of each bin. Displayed here are histograms for 20 bins, each randomly
selected from the full fiducial data vector and containing 14500 data points. Dashed lines in red
are Gaussian fits. Visually there is no significant deviation from Gaussianity.


  2. Henze-Zirkler multivariate normality test [123]: We implement this more general test that
     takes into account the Gaussianity across bins, using the pingouin library. Our data vector
     passes the test within the 95% confidence interval for all parameters.

   As previously mentioned, non-Gaussianity arises from low feature count, and in practice we may
manually remove low-count bins to push for a larger Nbin . However, we have chosen to maintain
the simple, non-ad hoc construction of our data vector, as the aim of this work is not to fine-tune
for the tightest possible Fisher constraints, but rather to provide a proof of concept for follow-up
studies on using persistent homology for generic tasks.

Convergence. We check the convergence of the numerical covariance and derivatives. Similar
to [64, 94], we calculate the ratio of σθ (Nsim ), the 1-σ marginalized constraint on θ from Nsim
realizations, to the constraint from all available realizations. Each convergence curve is the mean
over 50 random orderings of the realizations, and each error bar indicates one standard deviation
above and below.
   The estimation of the covariance converges very quickly with the number of fiducial realizations
used, for both our statistic as well as the joint power spectrum and bispectrum statistic (Figure
18). On the other hand, as found in recent works on Fisher analysis testing new summary statistics
[64, 89, 90, 94, 124–126], the convergence of the derivatives is not ideal. In short, for half of the
parameter set, it requires more simulations than we have available to moderately average out the
numerical noise in the derivatives (Figure 19). This issue is more thoroughly addressed in a recent




                                               – 27 –
σθ (Ncov)/σθ (Ncov = 10000)
                                1.05
                                                 PH                              Ωm
                                                                                       1.05
                                                                                                        P0 + P2 + B 0
                                                                                 Ωb
                                                                                 h
                                1.00                                             ns    1.00
                                                                                 σ8
                                                                                 P
                                                                                    mν
                                0.95                                                   0.95
                                       4500   7000   9500   12000 14500          w               4500    7000   9500   12000 14500
                                1.05                                                      1.05
                                                                                  local
                                                                                 fNL
                                                                                  equil
                                1.00                                             fNL    1.00
                                                                                  ortho
                                                                                 fNL
                                0.95                                                      0.95
                                       4500   7000   9500   12000 14500                          4500    7000   9500   12000 14500
                                                 Ncov                                                       Ncov
Figure 18: Convergence of the numerical covariance. Left Panel: Our summary statistic
from persistent homology. Right Panel: Joint power spectrum and bispectrum statistic. The
convergence curves are functions of the number of fiducial realizations Ncov used in estimating
the covariance. Each error bar indicates one standard deviation above and below the mean from
50 random orderings of the realizations. The fast convergence implies that the covariance is well
estimated.


paper [127]. In our case, we choose to estimate the uncertainty in our reported Fisher constraints
by extrapolating the convergence curves to a large number of realizations, as done in [64, 84]. We
employ the following parameterization

                                                            σθ (Nsim ) = a1 a−a
                                                                             2
                                                                               3 Nsim
                                                                                      + a4 ,                                 (B.1)

where the constants ai are determined by fitting to each convergence curve using optimize.curve fit
in the scipy library, taking into account the scatter around the mean from the 50 orderings. The
asymptotic value of a fit is then the predicted constraint given infinitely many realizations. We
observe that the reported constraints from persistent homology are biased low and are expected to
loosen by ∼ 16% on average. We apply the same treatment to the power spectrum and bispectrum
and show the extrapolated constraints in Table 3. The “extrapolated result” is identical to the
reported result—constraints from persistent homology are tighter for all parameters except Ωm and
  local . Hence, the conclusions of this work based on the reported constraints remain valid under
fNL
the above consideration.


C                             Independent Information from Each Component of the Data Vector

As mentioned throughout the paper, in this work as a proof of concept, we do not fine-tune our setup
for the tightest possible constraints, so the composition of our data vector should not be deemed
optimal. Nevertheless, it is meaningful to gain an idea of how much non-overlapping information
each part of the data vector contributes. We investigate this by computing the percentage increase




                                                                        – 28 –
                                                PH                                         P0 + P2 + B 0
                                 1.0                                            1.0

                                 0.8                                            0.8
σθ (Nderiv)/σθ (Nderiv = 6000)

                                 0.6                Ωm          σ8              0.6                Ωm          σ8
                                                                P                                              P
                                                    Ωb               mν                            Ωb               mν
                                 0.4                h           w               0.4                h           w
                                                    ns                                             ns
                                 0.2                                            0.2
                                   100   1500    3000    4500            6000     100   1500    3000    4500            6000

                                 1.0                                            1.0

                                 0.8                                            0.8

                                 0.6                                            0.6
                                                                 local                                          local
                                                                fNL                                            fNL
                                                                 equil                                          equil
                                 0.4                            fNL             0.4                            fNL
                                                                 ortho                                          ortho
                                                                fNL                                            fNL
                                 0.2                                            0.2
                                   100   1500    3000    4500            6000     100   1500    3000    4500            6000
                                                Nderiv                                         Nderiv
Figure 19: Convergence of the numerical derivatives. Left Panel: Our summary statis-
tic from persistent homology. Right Panel: Joint power spectrum and bispectrum statistic. The
convergence curves are functions of the number of realizations Nderiv used in estimating the deriva-
tives. Each error bar indicates one standard deviation above and below the mean from 50 random
orderings of the realizations. Dashed colored lines are extrapolations using Eq. (B.1). Vertical
dotted lines in gray separate the existent realizations (to the left) from the hypothetical ones (to
the right).


in the 1-σ marginalized constraints from excluding various parts of the full data vector. A significant
increase implies that the excluded part contains much independent information.
   We consider three schemes: excluding a nearest-neighbor parameter k value, excluding a homo-
logical dimension p, and excluding all birth Bi or death Di histograms. The percentage increases
are listed in Table 4. We observe that all the k’s are similarly informative, with the exception of
k = 1 for σ8 and w. On the other hand, the 0-cycles are in general more informative than the 1-
and 2-cycles, especially for σ8 and w (again). For birth and death histograms, they appear to be
comparably important.
    The percentages from excluding k = 1 and 5 back up our claim in the footnote24 under Section
5, in the sense that, if we exclude 0-cycles for those two k’s, constraints from persistent homology
are still generally tighter, and our conclusions remain unchanged.




                                                                     – 29 –
                                  Nderiv = 1500 (reported)                  Nderiv = 6000 (extrapolated)
       θ        Fiducial
                                   PH            P0 + P2 + B0                 PH             P0 + P2 + B0
    Ωm          0.3175            ±0.012                ±0.010                  ±0.014             ±0.010
    Ωb          0.049             ±0.003                ±0.004                  ±0.004             ±0.004
     h          0.6711            ±0.029                ±0.040                  ±0.036             ±0.043
    ns          0.9624            ±0.024                ±0.031                  ±0.029             ±0.033
    σ           0.834             ±0.005                ±0.008                  ±0.005             ±0.009
  P 8
   mν (eV)         0              ±0.034                ±0.063                  ±0.038             ±0.065
    w             −1              ±0.051                ±0.101                  ±0.062             ±0.113
     local
    fNL            0              ±69                    ±36                     ±72                ±37
     equil
    fNL            0              ±142                   ±233                    ±163               ±250
     ortho
    fNL            0              ±61                    ±70                     ±62                ±70

Table 3: Extrapolated constraints. The third and fourth columns are constraints from using
all existent realizations, as reported in Table 2. The rightmost two columns are the extrapolated
constraints if 6000 realizations were available. Both results are the same—constraints from persis-
tent homology are tighter for all parameters except Ωm and fNL local . Hence, conclusions based on the

reported constraints hold true under this consideration.

                                       Exclude k                            Exclude p-cycles     Exclude all Bi /Di
       θ
                 k=1       k=5      k = 15   k = 30   k = 60   k = 100   p=0      p=1     p=2    all Bi     all Di

    Ωm           +13%      +8%      +9%      +10%     +8%      +10%      +33%     +18%    +22%   +43%      +34%
    Ωb           +8%       +7%     +11%      +8%      +10%     +13%      +23%     +20%    +23%   +38%      +40%
     h           +8%       +11%    +10%      +14%     +8%      +11%      +23%     +24%    +23%   +49%      +45%
    ns           +11%      +8%      +8%      +8%      +7%      +10%      +34%     +17%    +17%   +35%      +38%
    σ            +35%      +7%      +4%      +5%      +4%       +5%      +81%     +11%    +10%   +24%      +22%
  P 8
   mν (eV)       +8%       +10%    +10%      +11%     +12%      +9%      +28%     +22%    +19%   +49%      +51%
    w            +49%      +7%      +7%      +7%      +5%       +6%      +104%    +13%    +14%   +29%      +26%
      local
     fNL         +6%       +4%      +4%      +4%      +3%       +5%      +25%     +9%     +9%    +16%      +18%
      equil
     fNL         +8%       +6%      +7%      +8%      +9%       +7%      +22%     +18%    +17%   +27%      +26%
      ortho
     fNL         +11%      +7%      +5%      +3%      +2%       +2%      +45%     +17%    +8%    +57%      +60%


Table 4: Excluding data vector parts. Each percentage shown is the increase in the 1-σ
marginalized constraint when a part of the data vector is excluded. A significant increase implies
that the excluded part contains much independent information about that parameter. We consider
three schemes: excluding a nearest-neighbor parameter k value, excluding a homological dimension
p, and excluding all birth Bi or death Di histograms.




                                                      – 30 –
D        On Applicability to the Sancho Suite of Galaxy Catalogs

The Sancho suite25 , based on Quijote, contains a total of 240000 galaxy catalogs at the fidu-
cial and varying cosmologies primarily designed for Fisher analyses. Sancho allows for studying
the Halo Occupation Distribution (HOD) model parameters [128] in addition to the parameters
surveyed in this work, and its integrity has been verified against a theoretical model based on the
effective field theory of large-scale structure.
    We have spent substantial time and efforts on applying our pipeline to Sancho. We could not
trust the forecast, however, because our data vector from Sancho does not pass the Gaussianity
tests: the distribution of data is bimodal for most bins. While the data vector can be made Gaussian
by subsampling the galaxy catalogs, i.e., randomly removing galaxies such that the number density
is uniform across catalogs, it happens that the data vector then responds to parameter change non-
linearly (for the ∆θ values inherited from Quijote), rendering the numerical derivatives unreliable.
   Even though our statistic computed on Sancho cannot warrant a Fisher analysis because of the
intractable likelihood that it seems to have, we emphasize that it can be used for inference tasks,
e.g., training a neural network to map our statistic to cosmological parameters.




    25
     https://quijote-simulations.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sancho.html, developed by Matteo Biagetti, Juan
Calles, Jacky H. T. Yip, and Emilio Bellini.




                                                 – 31 –
E                         Additional Plots


                                                                                             0-cycles
                                                                                                    −
                                   Ω+    −
                                    m − Ωm          ×102                                      Ω+
                                                                                               b − Ωb          ×102                                      h+ − h−          ×102
                          15                                                          15                                                         15
    Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                           Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                           5                                                          2                                                          5
                          10                                                          10                                                         10
                                                           0                                                          0                                                          0
                           5                                                           5                                                          5
                                                           −5                                                         −2                                                         −5

                           0                                                           0                                                          0
                                15      30     45                                          15      30     45                                          15      30     45
                                 Birth (Mpc/h)                                              Birth (Mpc/h)                                              Birth (Mpc/h)

                                   n+    −
                                    s − ns          ×103                                      σ8+ − σ8−        ×103                                      w+ − w−          ×102
                                                                                                                      2
                          15                                                          15                                                         15
    Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                           Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                          10                                                          10                                                         10
                                                           0                                                          0                                                          0.0
                           5                                                           5                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                 −2.5
                                                           −1
                           0                                                           0                              −2                          0
                                15      30     45                                          15      30     45                                          15      30     45
                                 Birth (Mpc/h)                                              Birth (Mpc/h)                                              Birth (Mpc/h)

                                                                                            local+    local−                                           equil+    equil−
                               Mν+++ − Fiducial ×103                                       fNL     − fNL     ×102                                     fNL     − fNL     ×102
                          15                               1                          15                                                         15
    Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                           Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                                                                                      5                                                          2

                          10                                                          10                                                         10
                                                           0                                                          0                                                          0
                           5                                                           5                                                          5
                                                                                                                      −5                                                         −2
                                                           −1
                           0                                                           0                                                          0
                                15      30     45                                          15      30     45                                          15      30     45
                                 Birth (Mpc/h)                                              Birth (Mpc/h)                                              Birth (Mpc/h)

                                ortho+    ortho−
                               fNL     − fNL     ×102
                          15
    Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                           2
                          10
                                                           0
                           5
                                                           −2
                           0
                                15      30     45
                                 Birth (Mpc/h)



Figure 20: 0-cycle mean persistence image differences for all parameters (averaged over 100 real-
izations, k = 15).




                                                                                               – 32 –
                                                                                           1-cycles
                                                                                                 −
                                Ω+    −
                                 m − Ωm          ×102                                      Ω+
                                                                                            b − Ωb         ×102                                      h+ − h−         ×102
                        15                              5                          15                                                        15
  Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                             Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                       Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                  2
                        10                                                         10                                                        10
                                                        0                                                         0                                                         0
                         5                                                          5                                                         5
                                                                                                                  −2
                                                        −5                                                                                                                  −5
                         0                                                          0                                                         0
                              15      30    45                                          15      30    45                                          15      30    45
                               Birth (Mpc/h)                                             Birth (Mpc/h)                                             Birth (Mpc/h)

                                 n+    −
                                  s − ns         ×102                                      σ8+ − σ8−       ×103                                      w+ − w−         ×102
                                                                                                                                                                            5
                        15                                                         15                                                        15
  Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                             Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                       Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                        5                                                         1

                        10                                                         10                                                        10
                                                        0                                                         0                                                         0
                         5                                                          5                                                         5
                                                        −5                                                        −1
                         0                                                          0                                                         0                             −5
                              15      30    45                                          15      30    45                                          15      30    45
                               Birth (Mpc/h)                                             Birth (Mpc/h)                                             Birth (Mpc/h)

                                                                                         local+    local−                                          equil+    equil−
                             Mν+++ − Fiducial ×102                                      fNL     − fNL     ×102                                    fNL     − fNL     ×102
                                                                                                                  5
                        15                                                         15                                                        15
  Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                             Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                       Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                        5
                        10                                                         10                                                        10
                                                        0                                                         0                                                         0
                         5                                                          5                                                         5
                                                        −5
                                                                                                                                                                            −2
                         0                                                          0                             −5                          0
                              15      30    45                                          15      30    45                                          15      30    45
                               Birth (Mpc/h)                                             Birth (Mpc/h)                                             Birth (Mpc/h)

                              ortho+    ortho−
                             fNL     − fNL     ×102
                        15
  Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                        2
                        10
                                                        0
                         5
                                                        −2
                         0
                              15      30    45
                               Birth (Mpc/h)



Figure 21: 1-cycle mean persistence image differences for all parameters (averaged over 100 real-
izations, k = 15).




                                                                                            – 33 –
                                                                                              2-cycles
                                                                                                    −
                                Ω+    −
                                 m − Ωm           ×102                                        Ω+
                                                                                               b − Ωb           ×102                                       h+ − h−          ×102
                        15                                                            15                                                          15
  Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                            Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                                                                                       2
                                                         2.5                                                                                                                       2.5
                        10                                                            10                                                          10
                                                         0.0                                                           0                                                           0.0
                         5                                                             5                                                           5
                                                         −2.5                                                                                                                      −2.5
                                                                                                                       −2
                         0                                                             0                                                           0
                             15       30     45                                            15       30     45                                          15       30     45
                               Birth (Mpc/h)                                                 Birth (Mpc/h)                                               Birth (Mpc/h)

                                 n+    −
                                  s − ns          ×102                                         σ8+ − σ8−        ×102                                      w+ − w−           ×102
                        15                                                            15                                                          15
  Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                            Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                         5                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                       5
                        10                                                            10                                                          10
                                                         0                                                             0                                                           0
                         5                                                             5                                                           5
                                                                                                                       −5
                                                         −5                                                                                                                        −2
                         0                                                             0                                                           0
                             15       30     45                                            15       30     45                                          15       30     45
                               Birth (Mpc/h)                                                 Birth (Mpc/h)                                               Birth (Mpc/h)

                                                                                            local+    local−                                            equil+    equil−
                             Mν+++ − Fiducial ×102                                         fNL     − fNL        ×102                                   fNL     − fNL        ×102
                        15                                                            15                                                          15
  Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                Persistence (Mpc/h)




                                                                                                                            Persistence (Mpc/h)
                                                         2                                                             2                                                           1
                        10                                                            10                                                          10
                                                         0                                                             0                                                           0
                         5                                                             5                                                           5
                                                         −2                                                            −2                                                          −1

                         0                                                             0                                                           0
                             15       30     45                                            15       30     45                                          15       30     45
                               Birth (Mpc/h)                                                 Birth (Mpc/h)                                               Birth (Mpc/h)

                              ortho+    ortho−
                             fNL     − fNL     ×102
                        15                               2
  Persistence (Mpc/h)




                        10
                                                         0
                         5

                         0                               −2
                             15       30     45
                               Birth (Mpc/h)



Figure 22: 2-cycle mean persistence image differences for all parameters (averaged over 100 real-
izations, k = 15).




                                                                                               – 34 –
References
  [1] G. D’Amico, J. Gleyzes, N. Kokron, K. Markovic, L. Senatore, P. Zhang, F. Beutler, and
      H. Gil-Marı́n, “The Cosmological Analysis of the SDSS/BOSS data from the Effective Field Theory
      of Large-Scale Structure,” JCAP 05 (2020) 005, arXiv:1909.05271 [astro-ph.CO].
  [2] M. M. Ivanov, M. Simonović, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Cosmological Parameters from the BOSS Galaxy
      Power Spectrum,” JCAP 05 (2020) 042, arXiv:1909.05277 [astro-ph.CO].
  [3] M. M. Ivanov, M. Simonović, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Cosmological Parameters and Neutrino Masses
      from the Final Planck and Full-Shape BOSS Data,” Phys. Rev. D 101 no. 8, (2020) 083504,
      arXiv:1912.08208 [astro-ph.CO].
  [4] T. Colas, G. D’amico, L. Senatore, P. Zhang, and F. Beutler, “Efficient Cosmological Analysis of the
      SDSS/BOSS data from the Effective Field Theory of Large-Scale Structure,” JCAP 06 (2020) 001,
      arXiv:1909.07951 [astro-ph.CO].
  [5] P. Zhang, G. D’Amico, L. Senatore, C. Zhao, and Y. Cai, “BOSS Correlation Function analysis from
      the Effective Field Theory of Large-Scale Structure,” JCAP 02 no. 02, (2022) 036,
      arXiv:2110.07539 [astro-ph.CO].
  [6] G. Cabass, M. M. Ivanov, O. H. E. Philcox, M. Simonović, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Constraints on
      Single-Field Inflation from the BOSS Galaxy Survey,” arXiv:2201.07238 [astro-ph.CO].
  [7] G. D’Amico, M. Lewandowski, L. Senatore, and P. Zhang, “Limits on primordial non-Gaussianities
      from BOSS galaxy-clustering data,” arXiv:2201.11518 [astro-ph.CO].
  [8] G. Cabass, M. M. Ivanov, O. H. E. Philcox, M. Simonović, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Constraints on
      multifield inflation from the BOSS galaxy survey,” Phys. Rev. D 106 no. 4, (2022) 043506,
      arXiv:2204.01781 [astro-ph.CO].
  [9] G. D’Amico, Y. Donath, M. Lewandowski, L. Senatore, and P. Zhang, “The BOSS bispectrum
      analysis at one loop from the Effective Field Theory of Large-Scale Structure,” arXiv:2206.08327
      [astro-ph.CO].
 [10] M. M. Ivanov, O. H. E. Philcox, G. Cabass, T. Nishimichi, M. Simonović, and M. Zaldarriaga,
      “Cosmology with the galaxy bispectrum multipoles: Optimal estimation and application to BOSS
      data,” Phys. Rev. D 107 no. 8, (2023) 083515, arXiv:2302.04414 [astro-ph.CO].
 [11] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim et al., “Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters,”
      arXiv:1807.06209 [astro-ph.CO].
 [12] Planck Collaboration, Y. Akrami et al., “Planck 2018 results. X. Constraints on inflation,”
      arXiv:1807.06211 [astro-ph.CO].
 [13] Planck Collaboration, Y. Akrami et al., “Planck 2018 results. IX. Constraints on primordial
      non-Gaussianity,” Astron. Astrophys. 641 (2020) A9, arXiv:1905.05697 [astro-ph.CO].
 [14] M. Biagetti, “The Hunt for Primordial Interactions in the Large Scale Structures of the Universe,”
      Galaxies 7 no. 3, (2019) 71, arXiv:1906.12244 [astro-ph.CO].
 [15] D. Baumann and D. Green, “The Power of Locality: Primordial Non-Gaussianity at the Map Level,”
      arXiv:2112.14645 [astro-ph.CO].
 [16] G. Cabass, M. Simonović, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Cosmological Information in Perturbative Forward
      Modeling,” arXiv:2307.04706 [astro-ph.CO].
 [17] J. Jasche and B. D. Wandelt, “Bayesian physical reconstruction of initial conditions from large scale
      structure surveys,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 432 (2013) 894, arXiv:1203.3639 [astro-ph.CO].




                                                 – 35 –
[18] H. Wang, H. J. Mo, X. Yang, and F. C. v. d. Bosch, “Reconstructing the Initial Density Field of the
     Local Universe: Methods and Tests with Mock Catalogs,” Astrophys. J. 772 (2013) 63,
     arXiv:1301.1348 [astro-ph.CO].
[19] M. Ata, F.-S. Kitaura, and V. Müller, “Bayesian inference of cosmic density fields from non-linear,
     scale-dependent, and stochastic biased tracers,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 446 no. 4, (2015)
     4250–4259, arXiv:1408.2566 [astro-ph.CO].
[20] M. Schmittfull, M. Simonović, V. Assassi, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Modeling Biased Tracers at the
     Field Level,” Phys. Rev. D 100 no. 4, (2019) 043514, arXiv:1811.10640 [astro-ph.CO].
[21] F. Elsner, F. Schmidt, J. Jasche, G. Lavaux, and N.-M. Nguyen, “Cosmology inference from a biased
     density field using the EFT-based likelihood,” JCAP 01 (2020) 029, arXiv:1906.07143
     [astro-ph.CO].
[22] G. Cabass and F. Schmidt, “The EFT Likelihood for Large-Scale Structure,” JCAP 04 (2020) 042,
     arXiv:1909.04022 [astro-ph.CO].
[23] G. Cabass and F. Schmidt, “The Likelihood for LSS: Stochasticity of Bias Coefficients at All
     Orders,” JCAP 07 (2020) 051, arXiv:2004.00617 [astro-ph.CO].
[24] F. Schmidt, G. Cabass, J. Jasche, and G. Lavaux, “Unbiased Cosmology Inference from Biased
     Tracers using the EFT Likelihood,” JCAP 11 (2020) 008, arXiv:2004.06707 [astro-ph.CO].
[25] G. Cabass, “The EFT Likelihood for Large-Scale Structure in Redshift Space,” JCAP 01 (2021) 067,
     arXiv:2007.14988 [astro-ph.CO].
[26] M. Schmittfull, M. Simonović, M. M. Ivanov, O. H. E. Philcox, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Modeling
     Galaxies in Redshift Space at the Field Level,” JCAP 05 (2021) 059, arXiv:2012.03334
     [astro-ph.CO].
[27] A. Andrews, J. Jasche, G. Lavaux, and F. Schmidt, “Bayesian field-level inference of primordial
     non-Gaussianity using next-generation galaxy surveys,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 520 no. 4,
     (2023) 5746–5763, arXiv:2203.08838 [astro-ph.CO].
[28] A. E. Bayer, U. Seljak, and C. Modi, “Field-Level Inference with Microcanonical Langevin Monte
     Carlo,” in 40th International Conference on Machine Learning. 7, 2023. arXiv:2307.09504
     [astro-ph.CO].
[29] N.-M. Nguyen, F. Schmidt, B. Tucci, M. Reinecke, and A. Kostić, “How much information can be
     extracted from galaxy clustering at the field level?,” arXiv:2403.03220 [astro-ph.CO].
[30] J. Robnik, G. B. De Luca, E. Silverstein, and U. Seljak, “Microcanonical Hamiltonian Monte Carlo,”
     arXiv:2212.08549 [stat.CO].
[31] J. Robnik and U. Seljak, “Microcanonical Langevin Monte Carlo,” arXiv:2303.18221 [hep-lat].
[32] D. Greenberg, M. Nonnenmacher, and J. Macke, “Automatic posterior transformation for
     likelihood-free inference,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2404–2414, PMLR.
     2019.
[33] G. Papamakarios, D. Sterratt, and I. Murray, “Sequential neural likelihood: Fast likelihood-free
     inference with autoregressive flows,” in The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     and Statistics, pp. 837–848, PMLR. 2019.
[34] J. Hermans, V. Begy, and G. Louppe, “Likelihood-free mcmc with amortized approximate ratio
     estimators,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4239–4248, PMLR. 2020.




                                                 – 36 –
[35] B. K. Miller, A. Cole, P. Forré, G. Louppe, and C. Weniger, “Truncated Marginal Neural Ratio
     Estimation,” arXiv:2107.01214 [stat.ML].
[36] N. Anau Montel, J. Alvey, and C. Weniger, “Scalable inference with Autoregressive Neural Ratio
     Estimation,” arXiv:2308.08597 [astro-ph.IM].
[37] L. Heinrich, S. Mishra-Sharma, C. Pollard, and P. Windischhofer, “Hierarchical Neural
     Simulation-Based Inference Over Event Ensembles,” arXiv:2306.12584 [stat.ML].
[38] K. Cranmer, J. Brehmer, and G. Louppe, “The frontier of simulation-based inference,” Proceedings
     of the National Academy of Sciences 117 no. 48, (2020) 30055–30062.
[39] J. Alsing, T. Charnock, S. Feeney, and B. Wandelt, “Fast likelihood-free cosmology with neural
     density estimators and active learning,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 488 no. 3, (2019) 4440–4458,
     arXiv:1903.00007 [astro-ph.CO].
[40] F. Villaescusa-Navarro et al., “Robust marginalization of baryonic effects for cosmological inference
     at the field level,” arXiv:2109.10360 [astro-ph.CO].
[41] F. Villaescusa-Navarro et al., “Multifield Cosmology with Artificial Intelligence,” arXiv:2109.09747
     [astro-ph.CO].
[42] T. L. Makinen, T. Charnock, J. Alsing, and B. D. Wandelt, “Lossless, scalable implicit likelihood
     inference for cosmological fields,” JCAP 11 no. 11, (2021) 049, arXiv:2107.07405 [astro-ph.CO].
[43] A. Cole, B. K. Miller, S. J. Witte, M. X. Cai, M. W. Grootes, F. Nattino, and C. Weniger, “Fast and
     Credible Likelihood-Free Cosmology with Truncated Marginal Neural Ratio Estimation,”
     arXiv:2111.08030 [astro-ph.CO].
[44] P. Lemos, M. Cranmer, M. Abidi, C. Hahn, M. Eickenberg, E. Massara, D. Yallup, and S. Ho,
     “Robust simulation-based inference in cosmology with Bayesian neural networks,” Mach. Learn. Sci.
     Tech. 4 no. 1, (2023) 01LT01, arXiv:2207.08435 [astro-ph.CO].
[45] C. Hahn, M. Eickenberg, S. Ho, J. Hou, P. Lemos, E. Massara, C. Modi, A. Moradinezhad Dizgah,
     B. R.-S. Blancard, and M. M. Abidi, “SimBIG: mock challenge for a forward modeling approach to
     galaxy clustering,” JCAP 04 (2023) 010, arXiv:2211.00660 [astro-ph.CO].
[46] B. Tucci and F. Schmidt, “EFTofLSS meets simulation-based inference: σ8 from biased tracers,”
     arXiv:2310.03741 [astro-ph.CO].
[47] F. List, N. Anau Montel, and C. Weniger, “Bayesian Simulation-based Inference for Cosmological
     Initial Conditions,” in 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 10, 2023.
     arXiv:2310.19910 [astro-ph.CO].
[48] C. Modi, S. Pandey, M. Ho, C. Hahn, B. Régaldo-Saint Blancard, and B. Wandelt, “Sensitivity
     Analysis of Simulation-Based Inference for Galaxy Clustering,” arXiv:2309.15071 [astro-ph.CO].
[49] C. Modi and O. H. E. Philcox, “Hybrid SBI or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Learn the
     Likelihood,” arXiv:2309.10270 [astro-ph.CO].
[50] J. Alsing and B. Wandelt, “Nuisance hardened data compression for fast likelihood-free inference,”
     Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 488 no. 4, (2019) 5093–5103, arXiv:1903.01473 [astro-ph.CO].
[51] M. C. Neyrinck, I. Szapudi, and A. S. Szalay, “Rejuvenating the matter power spectrum: restoring
     information with a logarithmic density mapping,” Astrophys. J. Lett. 698 (2009) L90–L93,
     arXiv:0903.4693 [astro-ph.CO].
[52] M. White, “A marked correlation function for constraining modified gravity models,” JCAP 11
     (2016) 057, arXiv:1609.08632 [astro-ph.CO].




                                                 – 37 –
[53] S. Satpathy, R. A. C. Croft, S. Ho, and B. Li, “Measurement of marked correlation functions in
     SDSS-III Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey using LOWZ galaxies in Data Release 12,” Mon.
     Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 484 no. 2, (2019) 2148–2165, arXiv:1901.01447 [astro-ph.CO].
[54] A. Aviles, K. Koyama, J. L. Cervantes-Cota, H. A. Winther, and B. Li, “Marked correlation
     functions in perturbation theory,” JCAP 01 (2020) 006, arXiv:1911.06362 [astro-ph.CO].
[55] E. Massara, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, S. Ho, N. Dalal, and D. N. Spergel, “Using the Marked Power
     Spectrum to Detect the Signature of Neutrinos in Large-Scale Structure,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 126
     no. 1, (2021) 011301, arXiv:2001.11024 [astro-ph.CO].
[56] O. H. E. Philcox, A. Aviles, and E. Massara, “Modeling the Marked Spectrum of Matter and Biased
     Tracers in Real- and Redshift-Space,” JCAP 03 (2021) 038, arXiv:2010.05914 [astro-ph.CO].
[57] O. H. E. Philcox, E. Massara, and D. N. Spergel, “What does the marked power spectrum measure?
     Insights from perturbation theory,” Phys. Rev. D 102 no. 4, (2020) 043516, arXiv:2006.10055
     [astro-ph.CO].
[58] E. Massara, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, C. Hahn, M. M. Abidi, M. Eickenberg, S. Ho, P. Lemos,
     A. Moradinezhad Dizgah, and B. R.-S. Blancard, “Cosmological Information in the Marked Power
     Spectrum of the Galaxy Field,” Astrophys. J. 951 no. 1, (2023) 70, arXiv:2206.01709
     [astro-ph.CO].
[59] M. Schmittfull, T. Baldauf, and U. Seljak, “Near optimal bispectrum estimators for large-scale
     structure,” Phys. Rev. D 91 no. 4, (2015) 043530, arXiv:1411.6595 [astro-ph.CO].
[60] A. Moradinezhad Dizgah, H. Lee, M. Schmittfull, and C. Dvorkin, “Capturing non-Gaussianity of
     the large-scale structure with weighted skew-spectra,” JCAP 04 (2020) 011, arXiv:1911.05763
     [astro-ph.CO].
[61] J.-P. Dai, L. Verde, and J.-Q. Xia, “What Can We Learn by Combining the Skew Spectrum and the
     Power Spectrum?,” JCAP 08 (2020) 007, arXiv:2002.09904 [astro-ph.CO].
[62] M. Schmittfull and A. Moradinezhad Dizgah, “Galaxy skew-spectra in redshift-space,” JCAP 03
     (2021) 020, arXiv:2010.14267 [astro-ph.CO].
[63] P. Chakraborty, S.-F. Chen, and C. Dvorkin, “Skewing the CMB×LSS: a fast method for bispectrum
     analysis,” JCAP 07 no. 07, (2022) 038, arXiv:2202.11724 [astro-ph.CO].
[64] J. Hou, A. Moradinezhad Dizgah, C. Hahn, and E. Massara, “Cosmological information in skew
     spectra of biased tracers in redshift space,” JCAP 03 (2023) 045, arXiv:2210.12743
     [astro-ph.CO].
[65] A. Pisani et al., “Cosmic voids: a novel probe to shed light on our Universe,” arXiv:1903.05161
     [astro-ph.CO].
[66] Q. Mao, A. A. Berlind, C. K. McBride, R. J. Scherrer, R. Scoccimarro, and M. Manera,
     “Constraining Primordial Non-Gaussianity with Moments of the Large Scale Density Field,” Mon.
     Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 443 no. 2, (2014) 1402–1415, arXiv:1404.3725 [astro-ph.CO].
[67] C. Uhlemann, E. Pajer, C. Pichon, T. Nishimichi, S. Codis, and F. Bernardeau, “Hunting high and
     low: Disentangling primordial and late-time non-Gaussianity with cosmic densities in spheres,” Mon.
     Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 474 no. 3, (2018) 2853–2870, arXiv:1708.02206 [astro-ph.CO].
[68] A. Nusser, M. Biagetti, and V. Desjacques, “Abundance of peaks and dips in 3D mass and halo
     density fields: a test for cosmology,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 480 no. 2, (2018) 1599–1606,
     arXiv:1804.05328 [astro-ph.CO].




                                                – 38 –
[69] O. Friedrich, C. Uhlemann, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, T. Baldauf, M. Manera, and T. Nishimichi,
     “Primordial non-Gaussianity without tails – how to measure fNL with the bulk of the density PDF,”
     Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 498 no. 1, (2020) 464–483, arXiv:1912.06621 [astro-ph.CO].
[70] C. Uhlemann, O. Friedrich, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, A. Banerjee, and S. Codis, “Fisher for
     complements: Extracting cosmology and neutrino mass from the counts-in-cells PDF,” Mon. Not.
     Roy. Astron. Soc. 495 no. 4, (2020) 4006–4027, arXiv:1911.11158 [astro-ph.CO].
[71] C. Uhlemann, O. Friedrich, A. Boyle, A. Gough, A. Barthelemy, F. Bernardeau, and S. Codis, “It
     takes two to know one: Computing accurate one-point PDF covariances from effective two-point
     PDF models,” Open J. Astrophys. 6 (10, 2022) 2023, arXiv:2210.07819 [astro-ph.CO].
[72] A. Banerjee and T. Abel, “Nearest neighbour distributions: New statistical measures for
     cosmological clustering,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 500 no. 4, (2020) 5479–5499,
     arXiv:2007.13342 [astro-ph.CO].
[73] A. Banerjee and T. Abel, “Cosmological cross-correlations and nearest neighbour distributions,”
     Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 504 no. 2, (2021) 2911–2923, arXiv:2102.01184 [astro-ph.CO].
[74] A. Banerjee, N. Kokron, and T. Abel, “Modeling Nearest Neighbor distributions of biased tracers
     using Hybrid Effective Field Theory,” arXiv:2107.10287 [astro-ph.CO].
[75] O. H. E. Philcox and S. Torquato, “Disordered Heterogeneous Universe: Galaxy Distribution and
     Clustering across Length Scales,” Phys. Rev. X 13 no. 1, (2023) 011038, arXiv:2207.00519
     [astro-ph.CO].
[76] G. Valogiannis and C. Dvorkin, “Towards an optimal estimation of cosmological parameters with the
     wavelet scattering transform,” Phys. Rev. D 105 no. 10, (2022) 103534, arXiv:2108.07821
     [astro-ph.CO].
[77] M. Eickenberg et al., “Wavelet Moments for Cosmological Parameter Estimation,”
     arXiv:2204.07646 [astro-ph.CO].
[78] G. Valogiannis and C. Dvorkin, “Going beyond the galaxy power spectrum: An analysis of BOSS
     data with wavelet scattering transforms,” Phys. Rev. D 106 no. 10, (2022) 103509,
     arXiv:2204.13717 [astro-ph.CO].
[79] M. Biagetti, A. Cole, and G. Shiu, “The Persistence of Large Scale Structures I: Primordial
     non-Gaussianity,” JCAP 04 (2021) 061, arXiv:2009.04819 [astro-ph.CO].
[80] J. H. T. Yip, A. Rouhiainen, and G. Shiu, “Learning from Topology: Cosmological Parameter
     Estimation from the Large-scale Structure,” arXiv:2308.02636 [astro-ph.CO].
[81] A. Cole and G. Shiu, “Persistent Homology and Non-Gaussianity,” JCAP 1803 no. 03, (2018) 025,
     arXiv:1712.08159 [astro-ph.CO].
[82] A. Cole and G. Shiu, “Topological Data Analysis for the String Landscape,” JHEP 03 (2019) 054,
     arXiv:1812.06960 [hep-th].
[83] N. Otter, M. A. Porter, U. Tillmann, P. Grindrod, and H. A. Harrington, “A roadmap for the
     computation of persistent homology,” EPJ Data Science 6 no. 1, (Aug., 2017) 17.
     https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-017-0109-5.
[84] M. Biagetti, J. Calles, L. Castiblanco, A. Cole, and J. Noreña, “Fisher forecasts for primordial
     non-Gaussianity from persistent homology,” JCAP 10 (2022) 002, arXiv:2203.08262
     [astro-ph.CO].
[85] M. H. J. Kanafi, S. Ansarifard, and S. M. S. Movahed, “Imprint of massive neutrinos on Persistent
     Homology of large-scale structure,” arXiv:2311.13520 [astro-ph.CO].




                                                  – 39 –
 [86] S. Heydenreich, B. Brück, P. Burger, J. Harnois-Déraps, S. Unruh, T. Castro, K. Dolag, and
      N. Martinet, “Persistent homology in cosmic shear - II. A tomographic analysis of DES-Y1,” Astron.
      Astrophys. 667 (2022) A125, arXiv:2204.11831 [astro-ph.CO].
 [87] S. Heydenreich, B. Brück, and J. Harnois-Déraps, “Persistent homology in cosmic shear:
      constraining parameters with topological data analysis,” arXiv:2007.13724 [astro-ph.CO].
 [88] F. Villaescusa-Navarro et al., “The Quijote simulations,” Astrophys. J. Suppl. 250 no. 1, (2020) 2,
      arXiv:1909.05273 [astro-ph.CO].
 [89] W. R. Coulton, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, D. Jamieson, M. Baldi, G. Jung, D. Karagiannis, M. Liguori,
      L. Verde, and B. D. Wandelt, “Quijote-PNG: Simulations of Primordial Non-Gaussianity and the
      Information Content of the Matter Field Power Spectrum and Bispectrum,” Astrophys. J. 943 no. 1,
      (2023) 64, arXiv:2206.01619 [astro-ph.CO].
 [90] W. R. Coulton, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, D. Jamieson, M. Baldi, G. Jung, D. Karagiannis, M. Liguori,
      L. Verde, and B. D. Wandelt, “Quijote-PNG: The Information Content of the Halo Power Spectrum
      and Bispectrum,” Astrophys. J. 943 no. 2, (2023) 178, arXiv:2206.15450 [astro-ph.CO].
 [91] SDSS-III Collaboration, S. Alam et al., “The Eleventh and Twelfth Data Releases of the Sloan
      Digital Sky Survey: Final Data from SDSS-III,” Astrophys. J. Suppl. 219 no. 1, (2015) 12,
      arXiv:1501.00963 [astro-ph.IM].
 [92] B. Reid et al., “SDSS-III Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey Data Release 12: galaxy target
      selection and large scale structure catalogues,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 455 no. 2, (2016)
      1553–1573, arXiv:1509.06529 [astro-ph.CO].
 [93] G. Gambardella, M. Biagetti, C. Moretti, and E. Sefusatti, “On the range of validity of perturbative
      models for galaxy clustering and its uncertainty,” arXiv:2311.04608 [astro-ph.CO].
 [94] C. Hahn, F. Villaescusa-Navarro, E. Castorina, and R. Scoccimarro, “Constraining Mν with the
      bispectrum. Part I. Breaking parameter degeneracies,” JCAP 03 (2020) 040, arXiv:1909.11107
      [astro-ph.CO].
 [95] D. S. Salopek and J. R. Bond, “Nonlinear evolution of long wavelength metric fluctuations in
      inflationary models,” Phys. Rev. D42 (1990) 3936–3962.
 [96] P. Creminelli, A. Nicolis, L. Senatore, M. Tegmark, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Limits on non-gaussianities
      from wmap data,” JCAP 05 (2006) 004, arXiv:astro-ph/0509029.
 [97] L. Senatore, K. M. Smith, and M. Zaldarriaga, “Non-Gaussianities in Single Field Inflation and their
      Optimal Limits from the WMAP 5-year Data,” JCAP 1001 (2010) 028, arXiv:0905.3746
      [astro-ph.CO].
 [98] X. Chen, M.-x. Huang, S. Kachru, and G. Shiu, “Observational signatures and non-Gaussianities of
      general single field inflation,” JCAP 0701 (2007) 002, arXiv:hep-th/0605045 [hep-th].
 [99] M. Biagetti, F. Verdiani, and E. Sefusatti, “PBI4.” https://zenodo.org/records/10008045.
[100] E. Sefusatti, M. Crocce, R. Scoccimarro, and H. Couchman, “Accurate Estimators of Correlation
      Functions in Fourier Space,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 460 no. 4, (2016) 3624–3636,
      arXiv:1512.07295 [astro-ph.CO].
[101] J. R. Bond, L. Kofman, and D. Pogosyan, “How filaments are woven into the cosmic web,” Nature
      380 (1996) 603–606, arXiv:astro-ph/9512141.
[102] A. Hatcher, Algebraic topology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.




                                                  – 40 –
[103] T. K. Dey and Y. Wang, Computational Topology for Data Analysis. Cambridge University Press,
      2022.
[104] H. Edelsbrunner and E. P. Mücke, “Three-dimensional alpha shapes,” ACM Transactions on
      Graphics (TOG) 13 no. 1, (1994) 43–72.
[105] G. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Liu, D. N. Spergel, C. D. Kreisch, A. Pisani, and B. D. Wandelt, “Void halo mass
      function: A promising probe of neutrino mass,” Phys. Rev. D 102 no. 8, (2020) 083537,
      arXiv:1910.07553 [astro-ph.CO].
[106] B. Y. Wang and A. Pisani, “Cosmology from one galaxy in voids?,” arXiv:2405.04447
      [astro-ph.CO].
[107] F. Chazal, B. Fasy, F. Lecci, B. Michel, A. Rinaldo, and L. Wasserman, “Robust topological
      inference: Distance to a measure and kernel distance,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research
      18 no. 1, (2017) 5845–5884.
[108] The GUDHI Project, GUDHI User and Reference Manual. GUDHI Editorial Board, 3.3.0 ed., 2020.
      https://gudhi.inria.fr/doc/3.3.0/.
[109] M. Carrière, S. Y. Oudot, and M. Ovsjanikov, “Stable topological signatures for points on 3d
      shapes,” in Computer graphics forum, vol. 34, pp. 1–12, Wiley Online Library. 2015.
[110] P. Bubenik et al., “Statistical topological data analysis using persistence landscapes.” J. Mach.
      Learn. Res. 16 no. 1, (2015) 77–102.
[111] H. Adams, T. Emerson, M. Kirby, R. Neville, C. Peterson, P. Shipman, S. Chepushtanova,
      E. Hanson, F. Motta, and L. Ziegelmeier, “Persistence images: A stable vector representation of
      persistent homology,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research 18 no. 1, (2017) 218–252.
[112] S. Kališnik, “Tropical coordinates on the space of persistence barcodes,” Foundations of
      Computational Mathematics 19 no. 1, (2019) 101–129.
[113] M. Zaheer, S. Kottur, S. Ravanbakhsh, B. Poczos, R. R. Salakhutdinov, and A. J. Smola, “Deep
      sets,” Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017) .
[114] M. Carrière, F. Chazal, Y. Ike, T. Lacombe, M. Royer, and Y. Umeda, “Perslay: A neural network
      layer for persistence diagrams and new graph topological signatures,” in International Conference on
      Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2786–2796, PMLR. 2020.
[115] K. Viswanathan, M. Biagetti, A. Cole, and J. H. T. Yip, “Information-maximizing persistent
      homology,” to appear in 2024 .
[116] J. Hartlap, P. Simon, and P. Schneider, “Why your model parameter confidences might be too
      optimistic: Unbiased estimation of the inverse covariance matrix,” Astron. Astrophys. 464 (2007)
      399, arXiv:astro-ph/0608064.
[117] T. Charnock, G. Lavaux, and B. D. Wandelt, “Automatic physical inference with information
      maximizing neural networks,” Physical Review D 97 no. 8, (Apr, 2018) .
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.97.083004.
[118] D. Cohen-Steiner, H. Edelsbrunner, and J. Harer, “Stability of persistence diagrams,” Discrete &
      Computational Geometry 37 no. 1, (2007) 103–120.
[119] C. Hahn, R. Scoccimarro, M. R. Blanton, J. L. Tinker, and S. A. Rodrı́guez-Torres, “The effect of
      fibre collisions on the galaxy power spectrum multipoles,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 467 no. 2,
      (2017) 1940–1956, arXiv:1609.01714 [astro-ph.CO].




                                                  – 41 –
[120] A. Pillepich et al., “Simulating Galaxy Formation with the IllustrisTNG Model,” Mon. Not. Roy.
      Astron. Soc. 473 no. 3, (2018) 4077–4106, arXiv:1703.02970 [astro-ph.GA].
[121] R. Davé, D. Anglés-Alcázar, D. Narayanan, Q. Li, M. H. Rafieferantsoa, and S. Appleby, “Simba:
      Cosmological Simulations with Black Hole Growth and Feedback,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 486
      no. 2, (2019) 2827–2849, arXiv:1901.10203 [astro-ph.GA].
[122] Center for High Throughput Computing, “Center for high throughput computing,” 2006.
      https://chtc.cs.wisc.edu/.
[123] N. Henze and B. Zirkler, “A class of invariant consistent tests for multivariate normality,”
      Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods 19 no. 10, (1990) 3595–3617,
      https://doi.org/10.1080/03610929008830400. https://doi.org/10.1080/03610929008830400.
[124] C. Hahn and F. Villaescusa-Navarro, “Constraining Mν with the bispectrum. Part II. The
      information content of the galaxy bispectrum monopole,” JCAP 04 (2021) 029, arXiv:2012.02200
      [astro-ph.CO].
[125] E. Paillas, C. Cuesta-Lazaro, P. Zarrouk, Y.-C. Cai, W. J. Percival, S. Nadathur, M. Pinon,
      A. de Mattia, and F. Beutler, “Constraining νΛCDM with density-split clustering,” Mon. Not. Roy.
      Astron. Soc. 522 no. 1, (2023) 606–625, arXiv:2209.04310 [astro-ph.CO].
[126] G. Jung et al., “Quijote-PNG: The Information Content of the Halo Mass Function,”
      arXiv:2305.10597 [astro-ph.CO].
[127] W. R. Coulton and B. D. Wandelt, “How to estimate Fisher information matrices from simulations,”
      arXiv:2305.08994 [stat.ME].
[128] Z. Zheng, A. L. Coil, and I. Zehavi, “Galaxy Evolution from Halo Occupation Distribution Modeling
      of DEEP2 and SDSS Galaxy Clustering,” Astrophys. J. 667 (2007) 760–779,
      arXiv:astro-ph/0703457.




                                                – 42 –
